[Amit Varma]: In January 2020, China had entered a crisis. Wuhan had become the first city struck by
[Amit Varma]: COVID-19, and things were bad, similar to if not worse than what Delhi went through
[Amit Varma]: in the recent second wave. Governance seemed to have broken down, and the Chinese President,
[Amit Varma]: Xi Jinping, even seemed to vanish from the public eye for a while. But after that, China
[Amit Varma]: got its act together. They controlled the pandemic, got the economy back on track and
[Amit Varma]: lifted the morale of their people. Part of this was decisive governance, and part was
[Amit Varma]: exceptional narrative building. Whatever the reality was, the Chinese knew how to spin
[Amit Varma]: a story. And sometimes, they also bent reality to their will. Over the last few months, China
[Amit Varma]: has rebounded and flourished, while both the Western world and China's neighbour to the
[Amit Varma]: South have struggled to contain the pandemic. Before COVID-19, China was building itself
[Amit Varma]: up as an emerging superpower. If anything, recent months have validated that impression.
[Amit Varma]: And the story of how China managed this crisis is so fascinating. Now, given how opaque China
[Amit Varma]: can be, will we ever know the full story? Well, you know what, we know a lot of it already,
[Amit Varma]: thanks to a guy who once wanted to be a Bollywood star, and then went on to become India's finest
[Unknown]: China analyst. He calls himself the China dude.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Manoj Kevalramani, who works at the
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution and writes a brilliant newsletter, Eye on China. Manoj has just written
[Amit Varma]: a book called Smokeless War, which has riveting details of how China rebounded after COVID-19
[Amit Varma]: hit. It has stunning insights on politics, economics, narrative building, and the state
[Amit Varma]: of Chinese society, as well as the state of the Chinese state. Manoj has been on the show
[Amit Varma]: before, and I will link all our previous episodes in the show notes. Taken together, his body
[Amit Varma]: of work is a masterclass on China. But when I invited him for this episode, my aim was
[Amit Varma]: not just to talk about this wonderful book, but also his journey so far, which I find
[Amit Varma]: so fascinating. He tried to get into Bollywood, but Bollywood does not deserve him. He spent
[Amit Varma]: a few years in journalism, but journalism does not deserve him. He spent a few years
[Amit Varma]: in China, but China does not deserve him. Who deserves him? You deserve him. You're
[Amit Varma]: about to be treated to a conversation I loved having about Manoj's wild journey through
[Amit Varma]: life. And there are so many insights packed in there. We speak about his journey for the
[Amit Varma]: first half of the show, and then we speak about China and his book in the second half.
[Amit Varma]: While you fasten your seatbelts, here's a commercial, or rather a public service message
[Amit Varma]: about how you can get your reading habit going again.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people uplevel themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills,
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. Also check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master
[Amit Varma]: social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees 2,500 if you use
[Amit Varma]: the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use
[Amit Varma]: the code UNSEEN. Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Manoj, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you so much. I'm a pleasure being here.
[Amit Varma]: Or actually welcome back rather because you've been here before. But you know, this is the
[Amit Varma]: first time you've actually been here after the pandemic struck. How have the last few
[Amit Varma]: months been for you?
[Guest]: It's been really interesting. We've been mostly locked up in the house and being locked up
[Guest]: with a four year old has been a boon and a bane. It's been lots of fun because he's kept
[Guest]: us entertained. But it's also been quite difficult because he's been fed up of being locked in
[Guest]: the house. And you know, and you constantly every time he falls in, you start to wonder
[Guest]: as to what's happened. So yeah, and kids will fall in. So there's lots of anxious days,
[Guest]: but there's also lots of fun because he keeps us entertained. But then yeah, it's not been
[Guest]: easy from a work point of view. But then I don't think I can really complain given how
[Guest]: difficult people have had it, right, you know, so it's been much, much more comfortable than
[Guest]: most people in the country or around the world. So can't complain too much. But then right,
[Guest]: you know, like I said, I whinged a little bit, but I can't complain too much.
[Amit Varma]: What is what is life without whinging indeed? So you know, you've been on the show before
[Amit Varma]: we've kind of chatted about your personal history a little bit, we've gone through some
[Amit Varma]: of that, but you've been on the show after such a long time. And in that time, the scene
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen has kind of become this sprawling thing where, you know, we go into a person's
[Amit Varma]: personal journey, a fair bit, and so on and so forth. And yours is particularly interesting
[Amit Varma]: because it's not as if I mean, no policy scholar is born a policy scholar out of the womb.
[Amit Varma]: But you've taken a very unusual journey, which includes a detour through Bollywood and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. So take me take me back to your growing up years. Like when did you grow up? What
[Amit Varma]: were you like as a kid? What did you want to be? I presume the film star thing was a
[Amit Varma]: bachpan se kind of thing. Take me back to the young non serious or non serious policy
[Amit Varma]: expert, non policy expert Manoj, as it were. So I had quite an interesting childhood, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we've, I'm a Sindhi, my family is sort of lived all over the place in many ways.
[Guest]: I was born in Kuwait, I spent most of my early years in Saudi Arabia, we moved to India in
[Guest]: the late 80s. And you know, my memories of Saudi Arabia in the 80s as a kid, are very
[Guest]: different to the Saudi Arabia that I sort of realized existed once I grew up, you know,
[Guest]: for me, it was this wonderfully protected environment where everything was really great.
[Guest]: People were really friendly, everything was safe and secure. And for me, the shift to
[Guest]: India, I remember we I moved to India when we were in when I was in my third standard.
[Guest]: And it suddenly felt like everybody's really, really sharp. Everybody's really, really smart,
[Guest]: street smart. And I felt like sort of completely a deer in cotton headlights, I had no sense
[Guest]: of and this is me in third standard, right? And I remember, again, cribbing about it at
[Guest]: home and to my teachers saying, why are people lying? Why are people doing this? So it just
[Guest]: gives you a sense of what a protected environment being in that place was. But yeah, I mean,
[Guest]: I sort of, I think I was fortunate that we came here as when I was young, because it
[Guest]: allowed me to adapt, because I know that for my older siblings, it was a bit of an effort
[Guest]: because it spent most of their schooling abroad. And, again, like I said, protected environment
[Guest]: in the Middle East. And when you came to India, suddenly, you had this rush of ideas, freedom,
[Guest]: and all of that. And that can be quite overwhelming if you're not used to it. And it can be quite
[Guest]: difficult. But yeah, I mean, I adapted quite early. I had zero interest in politics or
[Guest]: policy growing up. I was a typical Bombay kid. I shouldn't even say Bombay kid, I should
[Guest]: say suburban Bombay kid, because we are a different breed compared to the South Bombay
[Guest]: folks. And I was a typical Bombay kid. You know, I was interested in Bollywood, I was
[Guest]: interested in cricket. I was not really interested in studying too much. And I grew up most of
[Guest]: my time playing outdoors. You know, I mean, for folks who've lived in Bombay, this constant
[Guest]: thing of rivalries between different towers playing cricket. So that was most of my childhood,
[Guest]: doing all of that watching lots of Bollywood movies. And I think growing up, I had this
[Guest]: thing as a kid, I was quite a boisterous kid, I always had this thing of, you know, I used
[Guest]: to ape Amitabh Bachchan a lot. So I used to walk around the house, reciting dialogues.
[Guest]: And I think that stayed with me. So as I grew up, I wanted to get in Bollywood in one way
[Guest]: or the other. So I spent some time as I grew up, as I entered college, I spent some time
[Guest]: trying to, you know, get in shape. Because, you know, by that time, by the late 90s, being
[Guest]: in acting, wherever you were, whether it was on television or on the big screen, the requirement
[Guest]: for men had become that you needed to become bodybuilders and wrestlers and everything.
[Guest]: You can't just be a normal looking person. So I spent a lot of time trying to do that.
[Guest]: I spent lots of hours in the gym. And the peak of my career in entertainment was, I
[Guest]: won a talent contest, I think it was Lions Club or Rotary Club, one of those clubs, which
[Guest]: had a talent contest called Talash, which is essentially a pageant, which I ended up
[Guest]: winning. And for that brief fleeting moment, I thought this is my launch into Bollywood.
[Guest]: Alas, after spending a long time trying to do that, and realizing I don't have the aptitude
[Guest]: for it, neither do I have the skills for it. And then one fateful narration outside, if
[Guest]: anybody's familiar with Lokhandwala, outside Lokhandwala, there are lots of coffee shops
[Guest]: where you would see, particularly through the late 90s, 2000s, I don't know if even
[Guest]: today, lots of aspiring actors, models sitting outside speaking to producers, storytellers.
[Guest]: And I remember sitting through one narration outside a coffee shop. And this is after I
[Guest]: had spent a year in England studying IR. And I was listening to the narration, I was telling
[Guest]: myself, this is not what I can do. It's just not for me. The idea of, I can't remember
[Guest]: the story, but it was something about, you know, a song and a dance and a death and then
[Guest]: a rebirth. And I was like, yeah, this is not for me. And I remember at that point of time,
[Guest]: it was sort of my final decision that I can't do this anymore. It doesn't work for me. And
[Guest]: I need to find myself a serious job. Because I'm kidding myself by saying I'm just doing
[Guest]: this to pay the bills, because I'm spending 10 hours of the day trying to do this. So
[Guest]: yeah, so that was my sort of brief foray into Bollywood, a little bit of modeling, a little
[Guest]: bit of acting on theater and thing and a little bit of work with regard to television. But
[Guest]: yeah, I mean, like I said, before that, I spent a year in Britain, I studied international
[Guest]: relations, I got to that course, purely through happenstance. I wanted to do an MBA. And like
[Guest]: most again, most sort of middle upper middle class Sindhi family living in Bombay, my family
[Guest]: has been involved in business, my father's runs a business, and has been running that
[Guest]: for the last 45 years. And the aspiration was that, you know, the kids will follow and
[Guest]: get into the business. For me, the idea was, I didn't know if I wanted to do that business,
[Guest]: but I wanted to get out of the country and experience the world. And the easiest way
[Guest]: to do that was to go and study abroad. So I spent about a year or two years while I
[Guest]: was doing my modeling and trying to pay some bills by studying for GMAT and TOEFL and trying
[Guest]: to go out. I got admitted to universities in the US, but my visa was rejected. And this
[Guest]: is soon after 9-11. And the course that I was going to go and study was a two year MBA
[Guest]: with a option to take a couple of credits of anything else that you wanted. And because
[Guest]: of 9-11, I thought well IR might be fun, you know, just because suddenly it felt like the
[Guest]: world had, you know, something had changed in the world, which again is quite strange
[Guest]: because a couple of years before that we had the Kargil war, and I had zero idea that there
[Guest]: was a war happening. You know, again, this is Bombay, I knew, I knew when was Shahrukh
[Guest]: Khan's birthday, I had no idea Kargil was happening. I knew Barkha Dutt was doing something.
[Guest]: But beyond that, I didn't know anything. So yeah, so I, and my visa ended up getting rejected
[Guest]: for the United States. And, you know, the pressure from the family was that maybe it's
[Guest]: time you quit all of this, you're 21, why don't you just get on to the family business.
[Guest]: And I didn't want to do that. So the next best option was let me try and look for an
[Guest]: IR course in Britain, maybe, because I was going to do a few months of IR in the US.
[Guest]: And it is too late to apply for quality MBAs in Britain. So maybe IR in Britain, because
[Guest]: the courses are one year, the master's courses, I said one year of IR, and then one year of
[Guest]: MBA, I'll walk out with two degrees, I'll be super qualified. And, you know, most importantly,
[Guest]: it will give me two years away from the family pressure of trying to work in the family business.
[Guest]: And so I applied to Britain to a number of universities, I was lucky to get into a couple
[Guest]: and even get a scholarship. And I decided, yeah, why not, I'm going to go and study IR.
[Guest]: And three months into that course, I was fairly clear that while I still want to do some acting
[Guest]: and all of that, I this is an area of my interest. And I want to pursue this and journalism became
[Guest]: of interest following that. And that's how eventually I sort of landed into journalism
[Guest]: and sort of pursuing IR in terms of just reading much more in the field, rather than pursuing
[Guest]: professionally. Professionally, I moved towards journalism thereafter. And yeah, and so for
[Guest]: about 2005 2006, onwards, at least I've, despite all the different thoughts that I've had of
[Guest]: all the different strange things that I want to try and do as a career, I've stuck to journalism.
[Guest]: And I stuck to it till I moved to Daksha Shila in 2017.
[Amit Varma]: So fascinating arc. And by the way, you mentioned Lokhandwala cafes, which of course, I'm very
[Amit Varma]: familiar with in the sense that I live in Warsaw, right? So and I have lived in Lokhandwala
[Amit Varma]: as well. So one is aware of those cafes. In fact, I invoke them often, like, I think one
[Amit Varma]: of the most dangerous pieces of advice given to people, which I guess I'm glad you didn't
[Amit Varma]: follow for too long, is you know, when young people are told, follow your dreams. And that's
[Amit Varma]: really dangerous, because it's a survivor bias at play, where you see a bunch of people
[Amit Varma]: who followed their dreams and who made it big and all of that and overcome initial hardship
[Amit Varma]: and all that. But the bottom line is that most people simply don't 99% of the people
[Amit Varma]: who follow their dreams, so to say, don't make it. And the reason I invoke the cafes
[Amit Varma]: of Lokhandwala is I often say that just go to the cafes of Lokhandwala, sit down for
[Amit Varma]: a few minutes, eavesdrop to the conversations around you and you'll see what I mean. It's
[Amit Varma]: kind of poignant that you follow your dream and then you're in your 40s or 50s or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: and you're sitting in a cafe and Lokhandwala narrating a story to a bunch of fellow wannabes
[Amit Varma]: and everything has kind of passed you by. But thankfully, that cautionary tale doesn't
[Amit Varma]: apply to you when you're in Bangalore now, not in a Lokhandwala cafe, so to say.
[Guest]: So, you know, I think, I mean, I wanted to, I want to add one more story to this, because
[Guest]: I think it's sort of, and it's, this is just a little bit of people like I completely agree
[Guest]: with you, you know, it's really, really difficult. And there is a survivor bias to all of this.
[Guest]: And there are moments in which, you know, I mean, I still very vividly remember that
[Guest]: phase where you have to have a tremendous amount of self confidence and self belief,
[Guest]: to the point of delusion to be able to do some of that. At the same time, you have to
[Guest]: sort of be realistic. And I remember for me, one of the moments when that, you know, those
[Guest]: two worlds of realism and delusion collided was when, again, I had visited a model coordinator.
[Guest]: And a lot of times model coordinators ask you for money upfront to register you as talent,
[Guest]: and then they will sort of help you get more jobs. And I remember going there and this,
[Guest]: and this is again, this is maybe late 1990s, early 2000s, the gentleman asked me for 5000
[Guest]: rupees to register and of course, in sort of 2000 for a in 1999 or 2000 for a college
[Guest]: going fellow 5000 rupees was too much. And I was sitting there I was thinking and I was
[Guest]: like, okay, this is a lot of money. And okay, maybe I will, maybe I won't. And I said, okay,
[Guest]: let me think and I'll come back to you. And at that moment, he sort of, there's a call
[Guest]: that comes, he picks up the call and he goes like, Kiran is not available. I have this
[Guest]: bright young man in front of me. And you know, the moment I saw that I was like, look, I
[Guest]: mean, this guy's playing me, it's so straight that he's playing me. Yet, a big part of me
[Guest]: wants to really believe that he's not playing me. But I mean, like you said, at that moment,
[Guest]: I remember going back home and thinking to myself and saying, you know, a big part of
[Guest]: me want to say, okay, let's just pay the money, maybe you'll get this job. So that desperation
[Guest]: sort of stays with you. But as realism sort of hits, and I think it's important for people
[Guest]: who sort of do follow their dreams, as disheartening as this might sound, it's important to keep
[Guest]: that realism in mind. Because at the end of the day, the deeper down the rabbit hole you
[Guest]: go without realizing and being realistic, the more difficult it becomes to climb out.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure there are a whole army of ex Bollywood wannabes listening to this podcast right now
[Amit Varma]: and thinking to themselves, oh, that phone call was fake. But that's a poignant and a
[Amit Varma]: deep point about self delusion. Like I've always held that self delusion is one we are
[Amit Varma]: wired to be self delusional, because it's an essential quality that you sometimes need
[Amit Varma]: for survival. And to become good at anything self delusion helps in the sense that how
[Amit Varma]: do you become good at something, you become good at something by iterating endlessly,
[Amit Varma]: you do something again and again and again and again, and you suck to start with because
[Amit Varma]: everybody sucks to start with, and then they finally become good. And the point is, if
[Amit Varma]: you knew at the start how bad you are, you might lose heart, you might give up hope,
[Amit Varma]: you might, you know, not go on. So maybe you need to be self delusional. So you can fake
[Amit Varma]: it till you make it like one advice I kind of give my writing students is that if you
[Amit Varma]: enter a phase where you write something and you think it's shit, and you want to stop,
[Amit Varma]: that's actually the wrong conclusion you've come to one, it may not be shit, you may be
[Amit Varma]: being too hard on yourself, which is a good quality to have. But to all it means if you
[Amit Varma]: write something and you think is shit, is that your judgment, your taste is ahead of
[Amit Varma]: your ability right now. How do you get your ability to that level by just doing it again
[Amit Varma]: and again and again, you know, there's this, like I keep saying that in writing, I really
[Amit Varma]: don't believe that natural talent such as it is, is an essential thing. It's just a
[Amit Varma]: matter of, you know, getting your ass on the chair and just working hard at it and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. What did you do to win the talent contest?
[Guest]: So it was so I entered this again with the hope that you know, maybe I'll get some exposure.
[Guest]: And I mean, as I say all of this, I have to add, I'm as a person, I used to be generally
[Guest]: at least at that age, fairly introverted. Despite doing all of this, I was fairly introverted
[Guest]: because I was somebody who grew up, like I said, in a very protected environment. I was
[Guest]: a very chubby kid. So when it came to that, I had lots of body issues. And then there
[Guest]: came a point where I said I sort of tried to work out and I blame Hrithik Roshan for
[Guest]: all of that in my life. But at the end of it, what happened was that the talent contest
[Guest]: came about, I said, Well, why not just take part, it'd be a good networking opportunity.
[Guest]: We so we had these sort of rounds through the talent contest. So if I remember correctly,
[Guest]: the first round was a general sort of, it was a casual wear round. The next round was
[Guest]: an Indian wear round. And the final round was, again, you had final five participants
[Guest]: and you had a final question. I remember the final question was something like, if you
[Guest]: had one power that you could have asked for, what would that be? And I don't remember my
[Guest]: exact answer, but it was a twisted way of saying world peace. It was, I think it was
[Guest]: basically to the point that, you know, I would want to sort of inculcate, talk to people
[Guest]: about tolerance, acceptance, you know, openness, and so on and so forth. But then when I think
[Guest]: back about it, I think that as a human being who's had the opportunities in life that I've
[Guest]: had, I already have those capabilities, maybe I just need to exercise them better. So it
[Guest]: was just a slightly more fancy way of saying world peace. And that worked. After that,
[Guest]: there was the I don't know if the channel still exists, but there was a Sahara news
[Guest]: channel. So I remember being interviewed by them. And again, that's the moment where I
[Guest]: felt Oh, my God, I've arrived. That to me was like that big moment. And again, I realized
[Guest]: that after that, nothing really changed in my life. Apart from me, getting a trophy and
[Guest]: a photograph with I think there was Jukta Mukhi, who was one of the judges. And yeah,
[Guest]: and those things I still cherish. And sometimes when I'm reminiscing about days when I was
[Guest]: thinner, and I had more hair, I put out those pictures on social media.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I came across one of those pictures. And I must say, you're quite striking. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: maybe if you had a godfather or something, you could have made it in the industry. And
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned Jukta Mukhi. So again, just throwing a little bit of trivia out there.
[Amit Varma]: One of my friends lived or maybe still lives, but lived in the same building as her and
[Amit Varma]: her dog used to pee outside his door every single day. And and her attitude towards that
[Amit Varma]: was that, hey, you know, just a dog, what's a big deal? So anyway, that's really chill.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but my poor friend could not be so chill about it. Sadly, a very famous journalist
[Amit Varma]: also, I won't, I won't name him. So you mentioned world peace. And subsequently, of course,
[Amit Varma]: you did IR and you studied it a bit more and you figured out that, you know, it's not quite
[Amit Varma]: that easy. So tell me about the time studying IR, you know, is it just an interesting subject
[Amit Varma]: that you're doing? And because you're doing it, you kind of study it and all of that?
[Amit Varma]: Or is there a moment where you begin to fall in love with it, where you sort of begin to
[Amit Varma]: read outside the essential reading, so to say, or outside what you're required to read,
[Amit Varma]: and really get into it? Does that happen at any point? What is that process like?
[Guest]: Yeah, so for me, I was, I went to study in 2002. So my course began in September 20,
[Guest]: September 2002. And the first book that I picked up was in August 2002, to really sort
[Guest]: of study and I think it was a compilation of world history from 1945. And it took me
[Guest]: I think, the first quarter of the course. And again, to me, this was something really,
[Guest]: really new. Okay, I did most of my schooling in Bombay. My college was in Bombay, I went
[Guest]: to a commerce college, barely attended college. And again, the system in which how we teach
[Guest]: in India, at least how we taught then was so strict classroom based direct lectures,
[Guest]: as opposed to any engagement. And the perception in my head also through college was essentially
[Guest]: college life is there to sort of have fun, rather than really study, which is phenomenally,
[Guest]: I mean, I regret that after growing up that, you know, this is this was an error. But when
[Guest]: I went to Britain for my master's, one of the reasons why I probably spent more, paid
[Guest]: more attention was because I was spending much more money, but also because the environment
[Guest]: was such that you were sitting in a classroom with 15 people, and you came reading something
[Guest]: and then you discussed it. And everybody was equal, even your professor who was sitting
[Guest]: over there. And that was an interesting environment, it took some getting used to, but once I got
[Guest]: used to it, it allowed you to sort of spend some time with the material that you were
[Guest]: reading and that you were engaging with. And that allowed you to think a little bit more
[Guest]: about it. I think the fact that you were required to discuss and engage forced me in some way
[Guest]: to, you know, take things more seriously. And once I took things more seriously, I realized
[Guest]: I really enjoyed it. I liked the idea of thinking through an event, a concept, taking it to
[Guest]: a logical conclusion, and then trying and I'm sort of debating that with other people.
[Guest]: And I think that was the process that sort of got me interested. By the time I finished
[Guest]: my first term, which was December 2002. Again, we had a break during Christmas, I had the
[Guest]: option of coming back to India. And I said, Nah, I'm not flying back. I'm staying in Britain
[Guest]: and exploring. And I spent a lot of that Christmas break in libraries, a little bit of traveling
[Guest]: was spent most of it in libraries reading more, because I suddenly felt very inadequate,
[Guest]: that I'm sitting here in a course with people who have come here with the intent and background
[Guest]: in the subject that I have not sort of cultivated. So I spent a lot of time studying thereafter.
[Guest]: And again, I sort of fell in love with the subject because it just opened up my mind
[Guest]: to a world that existed, but I'd never seen. And thereafter, sort of, by the time the course
[Guest]: was over, I remember my dissertation was on the role of the United States in the Kashmir
[Guest]: conflict. And this is again, just two years after Clinton had left office, Bush had just
[Guest]: taken office, US Pakistan relationship was undergoing a tremendous change after 9-11.
[Guest]: For me, I came back to India for my research on that particular dissertation. And I traveled
[Guest]: to Delhi, spent time visiting the US embassy, the Pakistani embassy met with Indian diplomats.
[Guest]: And again, that to me was an eye opening experience because Bombay, Delhi are two different worlds.
[Guest]: I suddenly was in Delhi, suddenly was talking to all these people. I remember sitting and
[Guest]: having tea inside the Pakistani embassy. And I remember walking out of the Pakistani embassy
[Guest]: saying, what a nice gentleman, he offered me tea, he was so polite. Of course, things
[Guest]: are much different as you go deeper into a subject, but the experience of trying to engage
[Guest]: with people and trying to actually see what you've learned from a theoretical point of
[Guest]: view and from an academic point of view, and how diplomats actually operate, how things
[Guest]: actually function, it just fascinated me. So that's where sort of my love for the subject
[Guest]: picked up. What I had picked up along with that was an interest in journalism. So the
[Guest]: idea of how stories are told, how narratives are built, how you try to investigate something
[Guest]: that's happening, or how you try to contextualize the world around me. Those are the kind of
[Guest]: things that sort of fascinated me beyond just IR as a subject. And that's why when I sort
[Guest]: of got back, I mean, I spent some time thinking whether I wanted to do a PhD immediately after.
[Guest]: I would have done it at that point of time. But then I was about 23 years old, feeling
[Guest]: the sense that I need to get some work experience, I need to sort of make some money, or get
[Guest]: a stable job, lest again, the idea of, you know, you're getting old, you're getting old
[Guest]: starts to come up. And again, it sounds silly. Today, 20 years later, when you say somebody
[Guest]: who's 23, you say, Oh, you're getting old. But at that point in time, the idea was, oh,
[Guest]: in a couple of years, you're going to get married. And you know, so all of those sort
[Guest]: of things played in your head. But yeah, from from a subject matter point of view, my interest
[Guest]: in IR sort of picked up by the end of the first term of the course. And I was fascinated
[Guest]: by how history had worked, how the world works today, and so many things that I had just
[Guest]: not paid attention to. And then, of course, the role of journalism in contextualizing
[Guest]: the world around you, and how that works as a tool for storytelling, but also as a business.
[Guest]: And that's what I eventually sort of lean towards journalism.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. So what was the journey in journalism? Like, like, what kind of journalism did you
[Amit Varma]: want to do? What did you eventually start doing? And how different were your expectations
[Amit Varma]: from the reality that you confronted? I mean, you're not a journalist now, you were a journalist
[Amit Varma]: for a long time. So what about it made you sort of move on? And the interesting thing
[Amit Varma]: is just reading your book, I just felt that a lot of what is true of the Chinese media
[Amit Varma]: in different ways, can also be true of the Indian media in a certain way. And there are
[Amit Varma]: just like so many parallels, and we'll get into them, even though they're such vastly
[Amit Varma]: different countries. But just looking at the arc of journalism, like one, how different
[Amit Varma]: was it from what you expected? What excited you about it? What turned you off about it?
[Amit Varma]: And to, you know, what do you think has changed? Like, if you were 23 today, would you get
[Amit Varma]: into journalism today?
[Guest]: So I have a kid when he grows up, I wouldn't advise him to get into journalism. When I
[Guest]: got into the field, and it might sound a bit of a cliche, but yeah, there was a tremendous
[Guest]: amount of idealism. There was a sense that what you do can have an impact on not just
[Guest]: people's lives, but also on society as a whole, you know, that you can change things. And
[Guest]: I think that anybody who's young and who wants to get into journalism, if you don't have
[Guest]: that sort of a sense, and that fire in your belly, don't get into the field, you know,
[Guest]: because it doesn't really help what's happened to the field anyway, right now. When I got
[Guest]: into it, that was one of the things I mean, I remember, you know, again, I'm segueing
[Guest]: to Bollywood, but I remember watching Swades on television, sorry, on cinema with my family.
[Guest]: And I remember watching the movie. And I remember going like, yeah, you know, that's how you
[Guest]: need to have an impact. And again, I'm coming from a very privileged position to be able
[Guest]: to make that statement, you know, I mean, so this is about a privileged man, trying
[Guest]: to bring change. And therefore, it sort of appeals to me because I'm somebody who comes
[Guest]: from privilege, but that desire for, if you do something, you can affect change in this
[Guest]: country. And that, you know, and journalism was my sort of tool of trying to affect that
[Guest]: change. When I got into the field, my first job in journalism was with a small suburban
[Guest]: newspaper in Bombay, I worked there for about three months, I think the newspaper was called
[Guest]: on track suburbs, it was a very local thing. And I was the sub editor over there. So my
[Guest]: first job was sub editor of that paper, which was really amusing, because I had zero experience,
[Guest]: my English was good. And that's why I was a sub editor. But the lady who was junior
[Guest]: to me and our crime reporter, who was the key guy who got all the news that we got,
[Guest]: what the people who are basically running the show, you know, and it was an experience
[Guest]: for me to see that, okay, even though you may be higher above in the hierarchy, because
[Guest]: you don't know stuff, you know, you're still, you're not the person who's running the show.
[Guest]: And the other sort of learning that I had from those three months was how much field
[Guest]: reporting matters. If you have field reporting, you can do things journalism is not about
[Guest]: sitting inside an office. And that was a two big learnings for my first three months. But
[Guest]: my first sort of big job, the subsequent year came at NDTV. NDTV had a online presence,
[Guest]: it was expanding its online presence. And I remember joining them in Delhi, I moved
[Guest]: really for that job. And I was really excited. I mean, to me, that was a huge deal, getting
[Guest]: into NDTV. And I know that job at NDTV was the first thing that gave me some respectability
[Guest]: at home. It was no longer this somebody who's trying these silly things in Bollywood and
[Guest]: talking about journalism, but yet working, you know, in jobs that aren't really paying
[Guest]: him so much, and can't take care of himself. Suddenly, you know, it's not like NDTV was
[Guest]: paying me the word. But it was suddenly a case of, oh, that brand value is attached
[Guest]: to him now. So now there is something of value that he's doing in life. And it gave me a
[Guest]: lot of confidence also that okay, there is something that I'm doing that's now working.
[Guest]: Getting into the job on sort of on the website, it wasn't what I expected it to be. For me,
[Guest]: there was a steep learning curve. And I think I did fairly well learning fairly quickly,
[Guest]: not just the basics of journalism, but also realizing how important it is to understand
[Guest]: the medium that you're using. If you're on television, if you're on print, if you're
[Guest]: on digital, and evolving with the medium, because if you don't do that, then you die
[Guest]: very quickly. So that was again, another thing that I sort of picked up fairly, fairly quickly
[Guest]: at NDTV in terms of, I mean, when I think of digital journalism that time, because I
[Guest]: was in digital, to today, it's a sea change, right? At that point of time, I remember having
[Guest]: conversations with colleagues talking about how, as dot com journalists, we are, you know,
[Guest]: there's a barrel, there's gunk at the bottom of the barrel, then there are stones, and
[Guest]: then there's some more gunk, and then we lie there. That was us at the hierarchy of journalists,
[Guest]: because essentially, what you were doing was that you were repurposing stories that people
[Guest]: for television were doing, and you were just repurposing them for the website. And you
[Guest]: weren't adding any more value. And again, this is not a story that I've ever told publicly.
[Guest]: But one of my most memorable experiences at NDTV was, there was an interview that was
[Guest]: done with Parvez Musharraf, who was then president of Pakistan. And in that interview, he'd spoken
[Guest]: about a four point formula to resolve the Kashmir issue. And it was a long interview,
[Guest]: we were sent a clip, it was like about 1130 12 in the night, the interview was supposed
[Guest]: to run the next morning, my colleague and I were the last people in the office in the
[Guest]: dot com team. And we were told, can you put this up on the website? And you know, with
[Guest]: a small clip and the interview will run on air tomorrow morning onwards. So put it up
[Guest]: early so that it's done. Okay, we put up the interview. Now, the headline had a character
[Guest]: limit. And the headlines that we were putting were very long, they weren't fitting the character
[Guest]: limit. None, neither of us was tech savvy enough to go and change the code. And Musharraf
[Guest]: in the interview said something to the effect of I'm ready to give up the claim on Kashmir
[Guest]: if you accept this four point formula. So as good journalists who wanted something clickbaity,
[Guest]: we put up a headline saying Musharraf and in quotes, ready to give up Kashmir claim,
[Guest]: because that was the character limit within which it would fit. Apparently, it caused
[Guest]: a bit of a crisis the next day. And it was really good of the senior most management
[Guest]: of the of the organization to basically brush it off and saying, Look, guys, everybody makes
[Guest]: mistakes get on with life. But I think for a good 12 hours after that, once the issue
[Guest]: became a big deal, I think that was the first time that I genuinely worried I'm going to
[Guest]: lose my job. And I've caused something tremendously problematic. But yeah, but that was sort of
[Guest]: my experience of, you know, getting to grips with making mistakes, understanding why you
[Guest]: shouldn't do clickbaity things with sensitive things, understanding how you sort of contextualize
[Guest]: comments reports in much better fashion, understanding that at the end of the day, everything can
[Guest]: be changed. If you want even the source code to be changed, you can change it. But this
[Guest]: is my first six months at NDTV where I was trying to figure out all of this stuff. It
[Guest]: was a fascinating experience from there. And I went from NDTV to other news outlets, NewsX,
[Guest]: subsequently a very brief period in India today, before heading off to China, and working
[Guest]: with Chinese state media. But what the experience that I gained was essentially about how newsrooms
[Guest]: function, how do stories move through a newsroom, you know, I didn't spend too much time on
[Guest]: feed on the field, but I liaison with a lot of field reporters. So that gave you a sense
[Guest]: of at a desk level, what are the priorities of field reporters? What are the challenges
[Guest]: that they feel that they encounter? And what at the desk, can you assist them with? Because
[Guest]: often, you know, the reporter is on air, the reporter is doing a lot of the work. But the
[Guest]: team sitting on the desk in assignment are the guys who are essentially facilitating
[Guest]: everything. And they don't get the kind of credit that they should because they end up
[Guest]: doing a crazy amount of work to try and facilitate that one particular soundbite to come out
[Guest]: just as the field reporter is running around 24 seven to get that. So it's a team effort
[Guest]: and to figure out how that team effort flows is one of the things that I sort of also picked
[Guest]: up. The other and the most important learning that I've had throughout my time in journalism
[Guest]: is opinion is a dime a dozen. Reportage is what's of value. So you need to invest in
[Guest]: reportage. Unfortunately, that's not how the field has developed right now. The field has
[Guest]: evolved to favoring much more opinion, because again, it's cheap, and reportage is expensive.
[Guest]: Another important sort of learning and we I mean, in the course that we teach at Takshashila
[Guest]: I sort of, I take the media component of that course. And I talked about this, the idea
[Guest]: of objectivity. Fairly early on, you realize that there isn't something or anything like
[Guest]: complete objectivity. We all come from our biases, explicit, implicit, known, unknown,
[Guest]: unseen, unseen. And at the end of that, you need to the most that you can do is recognize
[Guest]: your biases and see how they filter and try to see if you can see them away. If you can
[Guest]: find if you can't find, but at the end of the day, if you can sort of sit back and say,
[Guest]: I've done an honest job on this, also explaining your limitations with regard to a certain
[Guest]: story, then you've done all that you can do. You know, beyond that, there's little that
[Guest]: you can do. Unfortunately, today, when I see journalism, I mean, I'm extremely disappointed
[Guest]: with the field, how it's evolved. In my last role in a media outlet, I was essentially
[Guest]: in charge of assignment at Veeon. And again, it was a year or a year and a bit about a
[Guest]: year and a year and a half of experience over there. It was exhausting, because we were
[Guest]: launching a new channel. There was so much work to do. And the idea was to launch a channel
[Guest]: which had a global appeal, which talked about world news and things like that. So you needed
[Guest]: a different kind of skill set. You needed different kinds of reporters. And just coordinating
[Guest]: with all those people, it was exhausting at the end of it. My favorite sort of experience
[Guest]: throughout these years has been, was an experience in Veeon where we had a reporter deployed
[Guest]: in Iraq, along with the Kurdish militia, an Italian gentleman, Daniele Pagani, excellent,
[Guest]: excellent guy. And he did a tremendous job of reporting throughout that time. I was his
[Guest]: handler from India, we would talk every night, sort of three o'clock, four o'clock at India
[Guest]: time, where he would give me updates randomly, if he had to head out for, you know, if the
[Guest]: militia was moving in on a certain area, and he was embedded with them. So he would call
[Guest]: me, he would give me a security update, and the call to agree, we both had to agree for
[Guest]: him to go, you know, with the militia for that particular raid. And there were at points
[Guest]: of time where I would say, No, you can't go. And we argued a lot. So this is like at 4.30
[Guest]: in the morning, India time, I'm half asleep, he's basically telling me I'm going, you know,
[Guest]: and your yes is a formality. And I'm arguing with him saying, No, you're not going, no,
[Guest]: you're not going, sometimes on security grounds, sometimes just in the reason that just for
[Guest]: the reason that I need you on air at 10am. Because even if you're in the field for the
[Guest]: next 30 days, if I can't show you on air repeatedly, I can't register with my audience that I have
[Guest]: a presence here. So my incentives are slightly different from your incentives, your incentives
[Guest]: are the story, my incentives are the story and the channel and the rest of it. So to
[Guest]: learn some of those things, and to experience some of those things, and to be in a position
[Guest]: where with the reporter, you're taking a call about essentially his security and his safety.
[Guest]: To me, that was something that I had never done. And that was an experience in itself.
[Guest]: It was frightening, it was exhilarating. It gave you a sense of power, yet you felt tremendously
[Guest]: powerless. And I think all of that is sort of what I take away from my media experience.
[Guest]: I haven't included my experience in the Chinese state media so far in this entire thing.
[Amit Varma]: So let's come to that. Tell me about that. Tell me about your relationship with China,
[Amit Varma]: as it were just just kind of getting into the subject. Because you know, the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: the rest of the world, even if you think of essentially any part of the world is far more
[Amit Varma]: familiar to us, because because of our history of colonization, because of the English language,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. So we can talk about Europe, we can talk about the US, we can of
[Amit Varma]: course talk about our neighborhood in terms of Pakistan, because I mean, we were all this
[Amit Varma]: same country to begin with. And we are the same people in a sense. But China for many
[Amit Varma]: people is just so deeply mysterious, like even after doing so many episodes on it, including
[Amit Varma]: a couple with you, I just feel like I barely scratched the surface of beginning to understand
[Amit Varma]: it or beginning to be able to think about it. So how did that start with you? Like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you get into any territory, I'm guessing, with a bunch of preconceptions,
[Amit Varma]: and then they fall apart, then you get to meet people, then you get to kind of understand
[Amit Varma]: the society a little bit more. Did you end up learning the language? And why China? Why
[Amit Varma]: did you go there?
[Guest]: Right. So this was, I mean, again, like most things happenstance in some ways, but also
[Guest]: in some ways, not by design, but there was sort of, there were markers to take me there.
[Guest]: Firstly, like I said, my father's been, my father and his brothers have been running
[Guest]: this export business for the last 40-45 years. And if you're exporting for the last 40 years,
[Guest]: you're doing something with China for sure. So we've had sort of export linkages with
[Guest]: China for many, many years. My first visit to the country was in early 2000s. But that
[Guest]: was a very brief visit to Shenzhen. And in my head at that point of time, China was essentially
[Guest]: crowded cheap goods. Those are the two sort of adjectives that went with the country.
[Guest]: And beyond that, I didn't really have a sense of the place. The first real time that I sort
[Guest]: of stayed, spent some time in the country was I think about 2004-2005. My father put
[Guest]: me on a bus from Hong Kong to a city, to a small town in Fujian province in South China,
[Guest]: where my cousin was living. And I didn't speak the language. I didn't understand anything.
[Guest]: It was a late night bus from Hong Kong. And for anybody who's traveled from Hong Kong
[Guest]: to China on buses, what happens is that as you exit Hong Kong customs, you get on the
[Guest]: bus in Hong Kong, you leave the customs, you get off, you exit the customs, you get on
[Guest]: the bus again, they take you to the customs terminal in Shenzhen, you get off the bus,
[Guest]: you enter China, and then the bus changes. Now, once you enter China, nobody spoke English.
[Guest]: And now the bus is changing. And I have no idea which bus I'm supposed to be on. So I'm
[Guest]: standing there dumbfounded. Somebody comes, young lady comes, she sticks a sticker on
[Guest]: my chest, which has some sort of a logo which is supposed to signify where I'm supposed
[Guest]: to go. I have no idea how she knows that. Next thing I know, I'm sort of in the sea
[Guest]: of people, tremendous, many, many buses. And somebody herds me inside a bus. I asked 10
[Guest]: times, is this going here? And they just nod because they can't answer in English. I don't
[Guest]: understand the language. It's about 11 in the night. And these are really nice buses
[Guest]: because they have beds in the buses. And each bus has a tiny TV attached to it. I'm watching
[Guest]: a Chinese movie, which I can't understand, but I'm lying down on the bus, just wondering,
[Guest]: am I going to the right place? My cousins told me that I will ideally reach the town
[Guest]: by about 630 in the morning, and he will meet me at the bus station. And I'm like, okay.
[Guest]: And again, this is a small town, right? So it's not like it's a big city where you can
[Guest]: find people and whatever. And again, this is not the time where you have Google maps
[Guest]: and everything. So you can actually even find things or even translator apps. So I'm sitting
[Guest]: in the bus at 330. The bus stops at a terminal. Everybody gets off. I don't get off. And I'm
[Guest]: like, I'm not getting off. It's 330. It's still three hours from my destination. The
[Guest]: lady and the driver basically come in. They politely forced me off the bus saying, this
[Guest]: is it. This is where it ends. And I remember sitting at the terminal, trying to call my
[Guest]: cousin who's not answering his phone for the next two and a half hours, wondering where
[Guest]: am I because it looked like an absolutely deserted sort of bus stop at the center of
[Guest]: nowhere.
[Guest]: People in China, the sort of cab drivers are sort of reaching out to me. Again, it seems
[Guest]: like you don't see too many foreigners in that part of the country. So cab drivers are
[Guest]: reaching out to me, they're sort of looking at me, they're talking about me, they're pointing
[Guest]: at me. And I'm absolutely petrified as to what's going to happen, because I just don't
[Guest]: know what to do. And at 530, my cousin shows up at the bus stop. And he basically comes
[Guest]: laughing and saying he was drunk overnight because he was he'd gone for a barbecue and
[Guest]: he forgot that I was supposed to come and the bus might have come early. So that was
[Guest]: my introduction to China, where I suddenly felt like I'm in this alien. So the sense
[Guest]: of you know, being in a different place was very, very strong in a place that I'm not
[Guest]: familiar with at all. And then in a place that feels incredibly inaccessible. It was
[Guest]: really, really strong. In that trip, when I stayed in China, I stayed for a month, I
[Guest]: think. And at that point of time, it took me a few days to sort of settle down, get
[Guest]: a sense of the place, get a sense of things. And then at that point of time, I traveled
[Guest]: to Beijing and Shanghai, myself just to sort of experience the place. And it was difficult
[Guest]: at that point of time to travel alone, particularly if you didn't know the language. But it was
[Guest]: fine, like you could manage and again, this was China was I think this was 2005 or 2006,
[Guest]: 2004 because China was preparing for the Beijing Olympics. And I remember going to Beijing
[Guest]: and seeing the countdown clock for the Beijing Olympics. It was that sort of gave me a sense
[Guest]: of Oh, because I remember my visit to Beijing was really, really nice. I found it fascinating.
[Guest]: I found the city absolutely enchanting. I found the sort of way the old city had been
[Guest]: maintained and how that had been blended with the new. I found that absolutely enthralling.
[Guest]: I remember walking on Chang'an Avenue outside the Forbidden City. I didn't have the time
[Guest]: to go inside at that point of time, but just the environment over there. And this was right
[Guest]: next to in the seat of Chinese power. And it was open, it felt free. And I was like,
[Guest]: this is really strange to what the perception of in my head is of communist China. And to
[Guest]: me, that was a bit of a shock. I remember on Tiananmen Square, meeting a bunch of young
[Guest]: Chinese who would walk up to you and who would say that, well, where are you from? Your English
[Guest]: is good. Can I speak to you in English? Because I want to improve my English. And I remember
[Guest]: randomly going for dinners with young Chinese, you know, for a hotpot meal while they practice
[Guest]: their English. I learned something about China and we had a good meal and we split the bill.
[Guest]: And I just thought that that was really, really interesting. I didn't experience anything
[Guest]: like this in the West, where somebody would randomly come up to you, you know, or in India.
[Guest]: And even if I had, I probably would have been deeply suspicious. For some reason, at that
[Guest]: point of time, I was not that suspicious. Or maybe I had, you know, youthful confidence
[Guest]: to the level of delusion that again, I was like, it's alright, it's not an issue. But
[Guest]: I thought it was really, really fun to be able to do that. And again, that was my sort
[Guest]: of shattering of the misperception of a place which is inaccessible, of a place which is
[Guest]: so closed that, you know, the idea of the sort of stereotype of a communist country,
[Guest]: where there is no freedom of thought, expression, whatever. I also remember, again, stereotypical
[Guest]: questions asking some of the, some of those students that I met about religion, politics,
[Guest]: and they were quite free to talk about those things, which I thought was fascinating, because
[Guest]: again, one thought that they would not, but they had very free, engrossing discussions
[Guest]: about some of these things. So that started to change my perceptions about what China
[Guest]: is like that, after that first few days of the trip where I found it, you know, the first
[Guest]: change was that China became more than just crowded and cheap goods to people who are
[Guest]: young, who are exciting, who are thinking, who are free, who don't have the kind of inhibitions
[Guest]: with regard to strangers. Again, it's very different from the China of today. You know,
[Guest]: it's changed quite a bit again. But as a society, I thought it was very, very interesting. It
[Guest]: was, it had, there were lots of similarities with India, in the sense that family was a
[Guest]: key component of people's lives. Parents in China also went out to marriage bureaus to,
[Guest]: you know, those parks where you have profiles listed to find a child, lots of pressure on
[Guest]: women with regard to marriage. So a lot of similarities also in terms of how our societies
[Guest]: are also structured. Even when it came to sort of things like food habits of the food
[Guest]: is obviously very different. And the habits are also very different in terms of the timings
[Guest]: of their lunch and dinner and all of that. But just the way they approached life, the
[Guest]: idea of you need to work hard to do something in life, it doesn't come easy. You don't demand
[Guest]: too much in terms of welfare, you depend on your own ability and your ability, you know,
[Guest]: some people come from privilege, some people come from cultivating it. But all of those
[Guest]: sort of, you know, values of hard work, of dedication, of perseverance, and things like
[Guest]: that, which I felt comfortable and familiar with, I sort of saw there and I said, look,
[Guest]: we're not really that different. We speak different languages, but we are in the sense
[Guest]: of yes, there is a certain Asian culture to all of this, which is very different from
[Guest]: the West. You got I got glimpses of that. And that made it much more accessible to me
[Guest]: as a society. And again, I cultivate, I develop friendships with people which I have maintained
[Guest]: over the years. And it's been fascinating to therefore sort of see, have conversations
[Guest]: with them today about where China is today.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. So a couple of these differences, actually, I'd like to explore because this is really
[Amit Varma]: interesting. Like one, you've pointed out the similarities, but you also said that there
[Amit Varma]: are differences. So what are these essential cultural differences like and then you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that China today has changed a lot and it's different from what it was. So what is
[Amit Varma]: that difference like? So two questions, really.
[Guest]: So firstly, in terms of cultural similarities, I've spoken about in terms of differences.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example of how conversations around politics went. When I asked people
[Guest]: about their political beliefs, their political desires, participation in sort of the political
[Guest]: environment, the answer that I got, particularly from people outside Beijing, was, yeah, all
[Guest]: of that is for people in Beijing to worry about, you know, I'm here to try and make
[Guest]: my living. So in some way, that social contract that was offered by the party in the late
[Guest]: in the 80s, and the early 90s, particularly, about will give you opportunity will give
[Guest]: you opportunities to grow will give you opportunities to become more well off, improve your livelihood
[Guest]: and all of that. But you surrender political control to us, that has some way been internalized.
[Guest]: And I thought that was very different from what happens in India. In India, that's not
[Guest]: the bargain that we are making with the state. And we are constantly fighting to not make
[Guest]: that bargain with the state. You know, even when you have a strong mind leader who comes
[Guest]: and says, I'm going to give you a chedin or whatever else, we are still fighting for the
[Guest]: bargain that that does not mean you can take away my liberty in terms of my political liberty.
[Guest]: In China, you saw that that bargain had been accepted in some way, at least my experience
[Guest]: was that it had been expected in some way. That's the scope for that was expanding at
[Guest]: the time that I had gone in 2005 2006, where it was a moment where China was much more
[Guest]: open and people were still talking much more about politics. But in general, that bargain
[Guest]: had sort of settled in people's mind in some ways. But again, some people were still pushing
[Guest]: boundaries. And these were activists, you know, people who believed in, you know, constitutional
[Guest]: rights and so on and so forth. People who believed in democracy and democratic processes.
[Guest]: But that was happening at in sort of in an elite level in some ways, the general people
[Guest]: that I encountered, I felt that, you know, they'd accepted that bargain. And they didn't
[Guest]: mind having given away their political rights for having this opportunity at a better life.
[Guest]: So that was one sort of big political difference. Again, from a religion point of view, this
[Guest]: was also fascinating. Again, I was new to the place. So when I asked people about what
[Guest]: they believed in, the answer that I got was most often was, what do you mean? What do
[Guest]: I believe in? Or who do I believe in? I believe in myself. And I thought again, that was quite
[Guest]: a fascinating answer. In time, as I've studied China much more deeply, I realized that religion
[Guest]: is much more than that simplistic answer in China, it's it is a powerful force. And not
[Guest]: just in terms of the, you know, Islam, Buddhism, whatever. But, you know, even local religions
[Guest]: are a powerful force in terms of organizing society and getting people to congregate.
[Guest]: But that sort of response to me was striking, very different from what I would get in India
[Guest]: from people. In terms of just day to day values, I felt that people, particularly the youth
[Guest]: in China, and even in urban sort of cities, was very independent. It was very independent,
[Guest]: they were very independent, they very early on people were sort of taking on responsibilities,
[Guest]: which for many people would be far beyond their age. And perhaps it had something to
[Guest]: do with the one child policy. From a family culture point of view, what I also found fascinating
[Guest]: was the fact that millions, hundreds of millions of people in China work as migrant laborers.
[Guest]: Lots of parents leave their children with grandparents in villages, while they are working
[Guest]: in cities. And you don't see your child for a year. You travel back once a year during
[Guest]: the spring festival or Chinese New Year, and you greet your children. And again, that to
[Guest]: me was a fascinating experience in terms of how these families survive, and what that
[Guest]: might do to these children as they grow up, what that does to parents as they're working
[Guest]: in cities that distance from their family, what that does to grandparents, because at
[Guest]: that age, you're now having to raise a child essentially. And I thought that was very different
[Guest]: from again, what we do in India, you know, people migrate, but people migrate with children
[Guest]: in India, you don't leave your children behind. But again, that that is a legacy of the hukou
[Guest]: system in China, the household registration system, but it's just shaped society in such
[Guest]: a way. So I thought some of these were really, really fascinating trends and fascinating
[Guest]: differences in terms of how China is structured, how India is structured. And I again, every
[Guest]: time you hear some of these conversations in India about in Bombay, you'd hear this
[Guest]: conversation about oh, Bombay is too crowded, we need to have a separate visa to enter Bombay
[Guest]: or some sort of system to block people. And some of the sort of hints are at the Chinese
[Guest]: hukou system. We don't sort of talk about the unintended consequences, the sort of challenges
[Guest]: that come up with that system. Likewise, when we talk about population control, again, a
[Guest]: topic which in India today is also becoming relevant again, we don't look at what the
[Guest]: Chinese have done and how the kind of problems that that's created, not just at a social
[Guest]: level, but also at an economic level today where they're having to undo everything. So
[Guest]: I think that some of these differences persist. And I think it's good for us to have gone
[Guest]: down the roads that we have gone down, rather than trying to ape them, because that degree
[Guest]: of re-engineering of society has tremendous challenges that come up for individuals, families,
[Guest]: which honestly, you know, if I was put in that position, I would find it really, really
[Guest]: difficult. And that's sort of my sense of the differences that exist between the two
[Guest]: societies in terms of, you know, I mean, I could go on and on about the differences.
[Guest]: So from from a political structure point of view, it's a unity structure, ours is much
[Amit Varma]: more representative participatory.
[Amit Varma]: Let me make a couple of observations and then go on to my next question, which kind of arises
[Amit Varma]: from what you said. One thing, of course, as far as population is concerned, is that
[Amit Varma]: I know that it's going to be an issue in India soon once again. And it's just it's just horrible,
[Amit Varma]: because I, you know, I've gotten so tired of kind of pointing out to people that overpopulation
[Amit Varma]: is not a problem. In fact, there's no such thing as overpopulation. People are our greatest
[Amit Varma]: resource. All the failures which we ascribe to, you know, too many people is actually
[Amit Varma]: the fault of bad governance. And the history of humanity is actually a history of people
[Amit Varma]: moving from places with less population density to more population density, moving from rural
[Amit Varma]: areas to cities. Why do people do that? Population density is a damn good thing. So I'll link
[Amit Varma]: to a column I wrote on that in the show notes. Meanwhile, just going to your observation
[Amit Varma]: about this sense of, you know, the politics is for people to Beijing, for people in Beijing
[Amit Varma]: to worry about, I'll just do what I do. And why India is kind of different. I'd say that
[Amit Varma]: yes, at one level, of course, India is different because democracy and local democracy, especially
[Amit Varma]: to whatever tiny extent it is there and all of that. But I'd also say that, conversely,
[Amit Varma]: in India, there's a certain apathy also that has developed over politics. I mean, one of
[Amit Varma]: the reasons I think that we don't punish the bad governance of our rulers, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: because rulers is indeed what they are, since we took the colonial state that they left
[Amit Varma]: us. One reason that we don't punish bad governance as often at the polls as we should, is the
[Amit Varma]: sense of apathy that the state will always be dysfunctional. It is what it is. Just get
[Amit Varma]: on with life. Just do your jugaar and get on with life. Now, my question is this. There's
[Amit Varma]: an old observation Jagdish Bhagwati made where he pointed out that people in China have a
[Amit Varma]: profit-seeking mentality where people in India have a rent-seeking mentality. And my hypothesis
[Amit Varma]: for why that might be the case is not so much to do with culture inherently, but more to
[Amit Varma]: do with the sort of institutions we have lived with for decades, where over here, where everything
[Amit Varma]: is top-down and the state has such a heavy part of the economy, certainly till 91. You
[Amit Varma]: know, rent-seeking was where you made your money. You got ahead by being close to the
[Amit Varma]: believers of power as it were. So people would think in this zero-sum way, whereas Bhagwati's
[Amit Varma]: point was that in China, it's more a positive some way, which is what you seem to be alluding
[Amit Varma]: to as well. So what do you think of this observation? Yeah, I mean, I don't entirely agree with
[Guest]: it. If you look at the Chinese system, you know, throughout the imperial times, you know,
[Guest]: for the past, whatever number of thousands of years, you will see that yes, there is
[Guest]: enterprise, there is innovation, there is all of that. But the state and the central
[Guest]: government plays a very, very strong role in the entire process. In fact, the entire
[Guest]: sort of towards the final few dynasties, what you will see is that, and a lot of it, actually
[Guest]: not even just the final few dynasties, even throughout history, what you will see is that
[Guest]: a lot of the sort of struggle in China in terms of social mobility is about reaching
[Guest]: the point of aristocracy, where your nobility associated with the state, you're the scholar,
[Guest]: nobleman, and you're associated with the state. So I don't necessarily think that that is
[Guest]: so, and that is essentially that sort of breeds rent-seeking over a period of time, because
[Guest]: then, you know, your family connections and so on and so on breed all of that. So I don't
[Guest]: think that necessarily, that has been the motivation. I think that there is a change
[Guest]: definitely that took place in the late 1970s and early 80s. The idea that the Communist
[Guest]: Party, and again, I'm making a very broad stroke here, but the idea that the Communist
[Guest]: Party officially sort of said that, look, we need to be rich, you know, and you need
[Guest]: to go out and make money. And that richness does not have to come with generating simply
[Guest]: wealth from within and creating rent-seeking. There is tremendous rent-seeking that still
[Guest]: took place. Through the 80s, you'll hear about, 80s and 90s, you'll hear about stories that
[Guest]: are called suitcase enterprises, where essentially bureaucrats are leaving the government and
[Guest]: they're, you know, selling off enterprises and they're, you know, cutting these deals.
[Guest]: And then sons of these bureaucrats or party members are eventually becoming chairpersons
[Guest]: of private institutes who are then winning government contracts. So there's a tremendous
[Guest]: amount of all that that's taken place. At the same time, what's essentially happened
[Guest]: is that once the economy was opened up in terms of price controls, in terms of opportunity,
[Guest]: that allowed people to make more money and the government encouraged it. It basically
[Guest]: said, look, our job is to grow rich. I mean, Deng Xiaoping's statement was essentially
[Guest]: that being poor is not socialism. And today, when we look back sort of 40 years down the
[Guest]: road, when the Communist Party gives us its official version of its own history, it describes
[Guest]: its history in three phases. The first phase is standing up, which is forming the state
[Guest]: under Mao Zedong. The second stage is growing rich. And today, the first stage is becoming
[Guest]: strong. So I think in that context of Mr. Bhagwati sort of saying that I sort of see
[Guest]: the logic of it, that yes, it's true. But it's also the case that there was tremendous
[Guest]: rent seeking, there is tremendous rent seeking that happens today. And that is why anti-corruption
[Guest]: campaigns by leaders have been critical to every leader. And every leader has launched
[Guest]: sweeping anti-corruption campaigns at different levels. In fact, sort of an acknowledgement
[Guest]: of this rent seeking came in early 2000s, when Jiang Zemin, who was then General Secretary
[Guest]: of the party, came up with this theory. So each leader has a theory. Mao Zedong had a
[Guest]: thought, Deng Xiaoping had a theory, you know, Jiang Zemin had a theory, Hu Jintao had a
[Guest]: theory, Xi Jinping has a thought. And in the Chinese system, thought is above theory. Jiang
[Guest]: Zemin's theory was called Three Represents. It essentially talks about how different factors
[Guest]: and different elements of society are going to be represented by the party. And one of
[Guest]: them is private enterprise. And the reason that he came up with that theory, or he sort
[Guest]: of framed it that way, is because a lot of the bureaucracy and the elite had sort of
[Guest]: moved from, you know, and sort of created these enterprises. Also a lot of private enterprises,
[Guest]: you know, folks who've done well, although who may not be members of the party, felt
[Guest]: that it's important to be members of the party to do well, and to do better. So the party
[Guest]: membership expanded because of this. And that sort of tells you that there is tremendous
[Guest]: rent seeking that's taking place. So I don't entirely agree with him, if I was to go back
[Guest]: even historically, through the thousands of years of imperial rule, to even the PRC period
[Guest]: from 1949. But I do see that the loosening of controls in the 1980s, and subsequently,
[Guest]: did create this impetus to, you know, become rich, because the party basically said that
[Guest]: we need to become rich. And whatever policies are needed to facilitate becoming rich, we
[Guest]: will do, and we will experiment with. And if that's the stated goal, then yes, people
[Guest]: that gave the encouragement to people to go out and seek profit, maximize profit, which
[Guest]: I don't think necessarily is something that existed throughout the history of imperial
[Guest]: China. I think the history of imperial China has not been about becoming, it has been about
[Guest]: occupation, it's been about defense, it's been about maintaining the glory of the Emperor,
[Guest]: it's been about people wanting to become noblemen and scholars and those sorts of things, and
[Guest]: tremendous rent seeking and all of that. Because if you go back to even the last dynasty, the
[Guest]: Qing, what you will see is that through the 1800s, there is tremendous poverty in China,
[Guest]: and there is tremendous inequality also. But there is obviously, China is playing a bigger
[Guest]: role at the world stage as a key trading nation, key provider of goods and all of that. But
[Guest]: I don't think people are driven by profit motivation, the higher goal is self actualization
[Guest]: in terms of the Confucian idea of how you rise above in society, and at the top of it,
[Guest]: you are a scholar, nobleman, and so on and so forth. So I think, therefore, I don't entirely
[Guest]: agree with that. But yeah, for the last since the 80s, I can sort of see where that logic
[Guest]: fits in.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, and you know, some of the listeners might worry that what is this Amit and Manoj
[Amit Varma]: are talking about seeking profit as if it is a good thing, what is going on, but you
[Amit Varma]: know, which kind of goes back to sort of what Jawaharlal Nehru once said to JRD Tata, where
[Amit Varma]: he said, quote, do not speak to me of profit, it is a dirty word, stop quote, and, and there
[Amit Varma]: has been this sort of suspicion of it. But you know, just to drive home that basic one
[Amit Varma]: on one point, how do you make profit, you make profit by providing someone something
[Amit Varma]: that makes them better off. You know, I keep referring to the double thank you moment,
[Amit Varma]: the famous phrase coined by John Stossel, where if you buy a cup of coffee in a cafe,
[Amit Varma]: you value the coffee more than the money you pay for it. And the cafe values the money
[Amit Varma]: more than the coffee. So both of you say thank you, both of you are better off. Whereas in
[Amit Varma]: India, there is perhaps too much of an exploitative mindset, which Bhagwati and anyone who has
[Amit Varma]: lived here might well have seen, but people can often have a sort of a more surface view
[Amit Varma]: of China. And earlier, you spoke about a broad strokes as well. Now, what happens is that
[Amit Varma]: you enter a strange place, or you, you know, start learning a new theory or whatever you
[Amit Varma]: get into something new, your initial notion of it is very broad brush, right? And that
[Amit Varma]: will include misconceptions. And right at the start, it will be incredibly simplistic.
[Amit Varma]: And then gradually, the scales fall off, and you discover more and more layers, and you
[Amit Varma]: go deeper and deeper and so on. So what was that process like for you where you really
[Amit Varma]: get into it? Like, what is that moment in time where you feel at home in China, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you're chilling, you're no longer surrounded by strange people you don't understand,
[Amit Varma]: for example, you're no longer nervous about, you know, what others might think of you?
[Amit Varma]: Or can you understand them? Or am I in the wrong city? What is this lonely bus stop?
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process? Like for you, as it were,
[Guest]: I went back to the country in 2011. And again, I went back as a trader, I got fed up of journalism
[Guest]: stepped away, went back as a trader. And I spent two years doing some freelance writing
[Guest]: work from China and traveling across the country, and trying to run a trading business, which
[Guest]: I was terrible at doing. And very early on, my father sort of realized that and he told
[Guest]: me, you know, if you want to move out, I wouldn't, it wouldn't be the worst thing in the world.
[Guest]: So you know, please try and do that. But so I spent those two years were really useful
[Guest]: for me, because it allowed me to travel, it allowed me to travel to many factories, and
[Guest]: different places where China was, where people were manufacturing things. And it sort of
[Guest]: took you to the heart of what is it that's gotten China this boom, this low end manufacturing
[Guest]: that's happening. And just to understand how factories are structured, what are the incentives
[Guest]: that people have, how negotiation happens, and how the system had changed, in terms of,
[Guest]: you know, it was no longer just, again, this is 2011, 2012. So low end manufacturing was
[Guest]: starting to somewhat lose its steam also. So to just see that, you know, there is this
[Guest]: gradation of factories from really high end places, which is manufacturing stuff for Europe,
[Guest]: the United States, to factories, which are actually in just somebody's bungalow. And
[Guest]: I've seen some of this in India, but never to the scale that what I saw over there. So
[Guest]: to me, that was an experience at the heart of China's economic power as to how some of
[Guest]: this is happening today, again, and just how rapidly things have changed is that today,
[Guest]: I think this is a, is a sea change today, technology plays such a huge role in China,
[Guest]: and just 10 years that I don't think that it's any more recognisable to what I saw in
[Guest]: 2011, 2012. But in 2013, eventually, I sort of, I wanted to continue to stay in that part
[Guest]: of the world, I was intrigued by the place, I found it comfortable by that point of time,
[Guest]: while I was travelling, I enjoyed chatting with people in cabs, I started to pick up
[Guest]: a little bit of Mandarin, even today, I think I there's so much more that I need to do to
[Guest]: learn that language. But I started to pick up a little bit enough to have a basic conversation
[Guest]: enough to crack a joke or two, you know, to be able to engage in some sort of a banter.
[Guest]: Fortunately, technology had improved. So you had translation apps for the more difficult
[Guest]: things. Despite that, I think I spent many times telling, telling a cab driver to go
[Guest]: left when I actually wanted him to go right. So I've done a lot of that. I've gotten lost
[Guest]: in the country a lot of times and sort of found my way back, which I think is one of
[Guest]: the I mean, once I got comfortable, to me, that was the best way to learn about the country
[Guest]: to just get lost in a place and then figure it out and then find my way back. You find
[Guest]: a lot of helpful people on streets. I saw a lot of I mean, I experienced a lot of warmth
[Guest]: with regard to India. Bollywood had a huge role to play with it. Old sort of Nehru had
[Guest]: some role to play with it because people did remember him. People followed current things
[Guest]: in India current developments. So that was entertaining. I started to get charmed by
[Guest]: the culture. I thought it was fascinating that this is a place where in the evening
[Guest]: in cities and towns and villages, you have these giant public parks. And suddenly, at
[Guest]: about six o'clock in the evening, you have music playing in the public parks, and you
[Guest]: have 50 6070 people gathering on the square and doing synchronized dances. And that's
[Guest]: the evening sort of community routine. So in smaller towns, it's a community routine
[Guest]: in bigger cities like in Beijing or someplace, there may be a routine by a group. But it's
[Guest]: also just you know, people in a public park, somebody's practicing Tai Chi, somebody's
[Guest]: there with a sword practicing his movements, somebody's dancing. And I just thought that
[Guest]: sense of freedom, that sense of being outside and doing all of that, I thought it was really,
[Guest]: really interesting. And it felt in some ways comfortable again, growing up in Bombay, as
[Guest]: soon as September, October comes till the next January, there's constantly music outside.
[Guest]: So it felt familiar in some ways also. So to me, that was the time where I sort of really
[Guest]: felt that I'm comfortable in this place. I'd gotten, you know, I'm a non-rich kid, and
[Guest]: I'd gotten the food had what had not been too much of an issue for me, I got comfortable
[Guest]: with it, I found interesting places to eat, I tried to experiment much more. And again,
[Guest]: I made friends, which really helped. Because, you know, you could talk about all sorts of
[Guest]: things. And, you know, and they were very curious, they were very, very curious people.
[Guest]: So I thought, again, that's fascinating that it's not like this is a closed society where
[Guest]: they also don't want to know about the world. And they don't want to share quite open people,
[Guest]: very friendly, very hospital. I moved to Beijing in 2013, when I joined China Central Television.
[Guest]: That was my first time staying in a big city for a prolonged period of time in China. Otherwise,
[Guest]: I was traveling and I was staying in smaller towns doing low end manufacturing. When I
[Guest]: moved to Beijing, to me, that was a process of getting used to how cities function in
[Guest]: China, and treated very well, the organization treated me very, very well. But very early
[Guest]: on, you sort of started to realize that this is different. This is not journalism. I'm
[Guest]: not exploring a story and nobody's interested in me wanting to explore a story. You know,
[Guest]: this is top down. What I can give them, and what they wanted from me, were English skills,
[Guest]: and my ability to try and build a digital newsroom. What they can give me is a steady,
[Guest]: really well paying job, and an experience into how China functions. So that was the
[Guest]: bargain that I essentially made that, okay, I'm going in there to try and figure out,
[Guest]: try and make some money, but try and also figure out how the system works, how things
[Guest]: work. And I think it was within a few months that I realized that, okay, I'm not going
[Guest]: to be doing any interesting journalism here. So I need to spend my time learning as much
[Guest]: as I want to learn about China. And it was a very comfortable life. It was the first
[Guest]: time that I was working in a media organization where after my eight-hour shift, I was not
[Guest]: expected to be in office. In India, if I said ever that after my eight-hour shift that,
[Guest]: okay, my shift is done, I'm going home, I'd be threatened with being fired. You know,
[Guest]: and I had most of my friends were in office. So if I felt like, okay, I'm sitting here
[Guest]: for half an hour more because I'm watching something on my laptop. And in case you guys
[Guest]: need some help, ask me, my work's over. But in case you need some help, just feel free
[Guest]: to ask me. And that was this huge thing that, oh no, a foreigner is okay to work overtime.
[Guest]: And I was like, it's not a big deal at all. But then that was their experience with
[Guest]: Westerners, right? People from Britain, from the US, they had very clear boundaries about
[Guest]: how long they would work and, you know, what they were contracted to do. Whereas for me
[Guest]: and for other Indians also working in the organization, it was, it was all right. It
[Guest]: didn't feel like it was a big burden. And again, I think that's where there was again,
[Guest]: a culture of work culture blending, right? Because the Chinese employees of the organization
[Guest]: worked insane hours, they didn't work eight hours. And I remember talking to them and
[Guest]: telling them, well, it's, you know, put your foot down. And then I was like, yeah,
[Guest]: I'm saying this from a position of privilege here. In India, I would never say that put
[Guest]: your foot down, because I know I would lose my job. So but you've understood that sort
[Guest]: of environment. By that point of time, I was very comfortable with the country with people,
[Guest]: I had learned how to engage with people in the organization also. And to be fair, we
[Guest]: used to have these morning edit meetings with the entire top brass of the English News.
[Guest]: So CCTV is a huge entity. It's China's national broadcaster. The English News is a small component
[Guest]: of it. The Mandarin News is obviously the biggest component. And then CCTV has sports,
[Guest]: entertainment and so many other networks. The English News editors, we used to have
[Guest]: this meeting every morning. And as somebody who's in charge of the digital newsroom,
[Guest]: I would go to that meeting and talk about what are the big priorities that we are covering today,
[Guest]: and also how world media is covering China. I don't think there was ever a day where I was
[Guest]: told not to say anything that was critical. So even on June 4, even on Tiananmen Square's
[Guest]: anniversary, I could sit there and I could say this is what's being covered. This is what's
[Guest]: being said. I think, you know, CCTV should cover this, you should talk about this. We were always
[Guest]: given a patient year, and then people went continued. So there was never a case of don't
[Guest]: talk about this. But there was a certain sense of, you know, look, the foreign staff may not
[Guest]: entirely get what our priorities are, what our incentives are, and where we come from, and all
[Guest]: of that. At points of time, that would annoy you, but at points, but sort of sitting back,
[Guest]: and when you think back, you understand where that where they're coming from. These are
[Guest]: individuals who are working in a system who are accountable to a hierarchy, and you will function
[Guest]: accordingly. You know, in my time there, I remember there was a former CCTV journalist
[Guest]: who had come up with a documentary called Under the Dome that was about pollution in China. I
[Guest]: think I've got the name right under the dome. She's a former CCTV journalist, very popular
[Guest]: journalist, who'd come up with a documentary. And you saw that there was debate around that.
[Guest]: And there was, I mean, you go back and anybody who's listening wants to go back and research
[Guest]: that controversy, you will see that the documentary got censored, it got banned,
[Guest]: and so on and so forth. Yet it got covered, it got tremendous social media coverage.
[Guest]: So it was a moment still where China was very vibrant, where there was lots of social media
[Guest]: conversation of different kinds. Today, social media environment is still very vibrant,
[Guest]: but it's become much more nationalistic. At that point of time, there was a far more freer debate.
[Guest]: And that space for freedom was becoming constrained. Likewise, I remember when,
[Guest]: again, I was in CCTV, when the US Supreme Court passed its judgment on gay marriage,
[Guest]: and CCTV, the network covered it, we covered it. But there's a certain ambivalence in China with
[Guest]: regard to policies with regard to, you know, the LGBTQ community. It used to at one point of time
[Guest]: be treated as a illness, and that's no longer the case for a long time. But still, it's not
[Guest]: really talked about, you know, policy issues of that nature are not talked about. And, you know,
[Guest]: we were all told, don't get into it, cover the news, but don't get into it. Now, but this was
[Guest]: huge on social media in China, you know, China has a huge LGBTQ population. Yet we were not covering
[Guest]: it. Apart from just saying the US Supreme Court has done this. I remember us putting out a post
[Guest]: on Chinese Twitter platform, you know, Twitter, like microblogging platform, Weibo. And we put
[Guest]: out a post about how there's a rainbow in Beijing today, and it had rained in Beijing. So one of my
[Guest]: colleagues just took a picture of the rainbow and we put out the and we said, oh, let's just
[Guest]: surreptitiously put it out on our organization's Weibo platform. And there was tremendous conversation
[Guest]: on that on the platform, which subsequently we took to the editors of the channel and saying,
[Guest]: look, we did something like this. And you know, we're sorry, but we did this. And can you see
[Guest]: that there is this conversation. And again, some of the incentives are also about reach,
[Guest]: even though it's a state run entity, there is an incentive about reach, because how do you
[Guest]: otherwise assess what influence you're having on society. So that is impressive. And that sort of
[Guest]: created this impetus that, okay, maybe let's have a conversation about something to do with gay
[Guest]: rights in China, you could try and push some boundaries. And as you remained in the organization
[Guest]: for longer, you try to figure out which is the best way to push these boundaries, you try to
[Guest]: figure out figure out which are the best battles that you can fight and win and which you should
[Guest]: just let go of. I mean, sooner or later, I just sort of realized that there was no point in talking
[Guest]: about Tiananmen Square during his anniversary, because it's a battle that I'm never going to
[Guest]: win. So I might as well not talk about it. But I remember in 2014, when the umbrella protests were
[Guest]: happening in Hong Kong, I remember having very loud arguments with my editor, basically saying,
[Guest]: we should be covering this, we should be covering this. And the organization was not covering it
[Guest]: for some time. It did eventually. But in those initial days, in hindsight, when I thought about
[Guest]: it, and as I studied China much more, I realized that the reason that we were not covering it at
[Guest]: that point of time, was because there was no clarity from politically at the top of how do
[Guest]: you approach this? You know, what is the narrative that you want on this? As that parity came, you
[Guest]: saw Chinese media, including CCTV and CGTN, which is the English language network, cover it from
[Guest]: the point of view of, yeah, these protesters want this, but look, they are inspired by the West and
[Guest]: also look at the fact that they are disrupting society and cab drivers are losing business,
[Guest]: and so on and so forth. And again, anybody who's looking at protests in India can see similar sort
[Guest]: of themes that get picked up by media which want to cover and that tells you where that media's
[Guest]: incentives are coming from. But for the first couple of days to a week or so, it wasn't covered
[Guest]: that umbrella protest movement. And the reason it wasn't covered in hindsight, I realized is because
[Guest]: the political line was not clear. For me as a journalist, it was a case of this is a massive
[Guest]: story. Why are we not covering it? And you know, yeah, you may want your spin on it, but at least
[Guest]: start covering it. And that was not happening. So you start to realize as you spend time,
[Guest]: what boundaries you're pushing, what boundaries you need to push, where you can win, where you
[Guest]: can't win. And to me, that was fascinating. I think the last sort of example that I will give
[Guest]: of my time at CCTV was every year in March, the Chinese parliament meets. So there are these two
[Guest]: bodies, the NPC, which is the parliament and the CPPCC, which is a consultative body for the
[Guest]: legislature. And these are really sort of big sort of, you know, there's lots of fanfare around these
[Guest]: events. These are called the two sessions. And again, this is about the Chinese state wanting
[Guest]: to use digital media as a platform to send their message and to sort of boost their message. And
[Guest]: CCTV had decided at that point in time that, okay, what do we do on digital media that we can do
[Guest]: different from television? Because television is giving you the standard stories, right? But how do
[Guest]: we do something different on digital media? And the idea was, okay, we will get different
[Guest]: spokespersons from different ministries and government departments to come into the office,
[Guest]: and they can take live questions from Weibo and Facebook and whatever. Now, of course, these
[Guest]: questions were not live in the sense that they weren't vetted and censored. But the experience
[Guest]: of having bureaucrats and spokespersons from ministries come in, and to have that experience
[Guest]: of what is it like to engage with these people, to set all of that up, to me was an absolutely
[Guest]: incredible sort of setting of, you know, and nothing like that I'd experienced in India and
[Guest]: Indian media. And that's where I sort of differentiate between the freedom in the
[Guest]: Indian media and the Chinese press, where I remember listening to responses being given by
[Guest]: the spokesperson who had come in, I think the most vivid memory I have is of the spokesperson
[Guest]: from the National Health Commission. He was answering questions, and we were typing out
[Guest]: the answers, you know, because while he's answering live, you're also answering live
[Guest]: on Facebook and posting the responses. And there was a censor standing behind me,
[Guest]: who would look at certain words and say, not that. And you delete that particular sentence.
[Guest]: So again, very, very different from what this is. So at that point of time, I mean, of course,
[Guest]: to me, it was just an interesting experience at that point of time as a journalist. But
[Guest]: when I sort of get back to looking at Chandler from an analyst's point of view, you know,
[Guest]: that I've done for the last three years, I realized this is, and I talk about this in the
[Guest]: book that we will talk about, that this was sort of early days of cultivating tools for discourse
[Guest]: power. And this was fairly well thought in the sense that the leadership had a vision of,
[Guest]: we want to do some of these things to cultivate these tools. And this was the process of doing
[Guest]: that and creating these tools. And now when I think back at all of this, I think that
[Guest]: it's fascinating that I was at the heart of that process when at least in one organization,
[Guest]: this was being cultivated. And in some ways, how futile some of the pushback was that I was trying
[Guest]: to do, but in some ways also how fascinating it was that, you know, the people who were working
[Guest]: on these things, my Chinese colleagues, they were not people who necessarily entirely bought
[Guest]: everything the party was telling them. These are smart, intelligent, articulate people
[Guest]: who understood how the system functions and who much more than me, of course, had a sense of
[Guest]: what battles to pick and what battles not to pick. And it's truly a credit to some of these,
[Guest]: some of them, you know, like how they've managed to push back against some of the pressures in the
[Guest]: system over the years. And I sort of empathize with a lot of and look at them and think that
[Guest]: I don't think in the Indian media, we've had half the pressure, yet, we seem to have succumbed much
[Guest]: more easily. And therefore, so I have a lot of regard for my colleagues who I worked with,
[Guest]: and generally journalists in China. Yeah, I mean, talking about succumbing,
[Amit Varma]: there was a famous comment made during the emergency where someone spoke about Indian
[Amit Varma]: journalists and said that when they were asked to bend, they chose to crawl, you know, words to
[Amit Varma]: crawl, you know, words to that effect. And it struck me that, you know, with a lot of your editors,
[Amit Varma]: you know, at CCTV deciding what is cautious to talk about and what is not, the incentives are
[Amit Varma]: clearly tailored towards erring on the side of caution, towards crawling rather than bending,
[Amit Varma]: because you know, why take the slightest chance? Why do you want to even go there? So before we
[Amit Varma]: get back to your personal arc, question that strikes me from something you said, where you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how, when you were there, the Chinese were so friendly, they were always kind of willing
[Amit Varma]: to talk earlier, you spoke about how those students would meet you when you went for the
[Amit Varma]: first time to Beijing, and, you know, take you out, ask you questions, all of that. I visited
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan in 2006, I was covering the cricket tour. And one of the things that struck me there was
[Amit Varma]: the incredible friendliness of the local people, right? Like I remember on the evening, we landed
[Amit Varma]: in Lahore, you know, three of us journalists, we went to a nearby grocery store or whatever to buy
[Amit Varma]: pencil cells and all that for our equipment. And at one point, one of us mentioned that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, we are from India, and they refused to take any money. And this is almost like a cliche of
[Amit Varma]: hospitality or you are our guest and so on. But literally, throughout the tour, that's the kind
[Amit Varma]: of friendliness that we got. And it struck me that in India, a Pakistani would not get that kind of
[Amit Varma]: friendliness. Like, of course, if you're white, you've come from the US, you've come from England,
[Amit Varma]: of course, we'll pander to your white ass because colonialism and all that. But not to not to a
[Amit Varma]: Pakistani and even Chinese people here would often be treated with so much distrust and xenophobia.
[Amit Varma]: And, and of course, African Americans, like I remember back in college, how people would look
[Amit Varma]: at students who are from Africa, I don't know why I said African Americans, that students were from
[Amit Varma]: Africa and the kind of racism that was there. I'm kind of thinking aloud here because it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that maybe I'm reading too much into it because the sort of things I would notice about my own
[Amit Varma]: people is the stuff that I don't agree with or which kind of repulses me and I would take the
[Amit Varma]: rest of it for granted. And it is possible that no, on the whole, we are also friendly and hospitable.
[Amit Varma]: So I thought, hey, why not ask you and what's your take on it?
[Guest]: No, I think on the whole, we are also reasonably friendly and hospitable. I don't think that's the
[Guest]: case. And I mean, if I look at China, what I would say is that it depends, right? You know,
[Guest]: it depends who you are, where you're coming from, where you where you are encountering the person
[Guest]: and how. All of that matters. I don't think you'll find people in China saying, no, it's on me,
[Guest]: don't need to pay the bill unless it's your friend and you've gone out for a meal, then they'll be
[Guest]: like extremely hospitable. But a bargain is a bargain. That's very, very clear. And it deals
[Guest]: a deal which I sort of respect that I think it's a very healthy sort of way to do things that,
[Guest]: you know, we talk about money first up, like particularly we say with tourist guides.
[Guest]: And when I took my family to Beijing for a holiday, we were about five or six people.
[Guest]: I asked somebody as a tourist guide to accompany us because we wanted to go to the,
[Guest]: you know, the tomb of Mao Zedong, the mausoleum of Mao Zedong and all of that. And we wanted to
[Guest]: sort of explore other parts of the city, which I didn't necessarily know of as well. And it was a
[Guest]: college student who was our guide. And we were very clear, he had a very clear conversation up
[Guest]: front about money and everything. And once that is out of the way, you can have fun. And you know,
[Guest]: the person can be very engaging and all that. So I appreciate that about the Chinese in some way,
[Guest]: that they are very, very clear about money. The other thing in terms of hospitality, again,
[Guest]: there can be a tremendous amount of racism, xenophobia in China. We see that even in policies
[Guest]: with regard to ethnic minorities in China. You know, that's been one of the biggest issues for
[Guest]: the last couple of years with regard to Xinjiang. So that exists. And I don't think that is,
[Guest]: there's a certain amount of chauvinism with regard to ethnic minorities in the country.
[Guest]: In terms of foreigners, I think there's also a gradation, right? I mean,
[Guest]: the kind of treatment that a white person would get is very different from the kind of treatment
[Guest]: that I would have gotten, you know. And I think that reflects not just in terms of
[Guest]: hierarchies in organizations, but also pay scales, ability to say things and get away with them and
[Guest]: things like that, you know. And I think that exists. And that is, to me, that's a case of
[Guest]: internalized, you know, racism in terms of hierarchy of systems. And I think if you go back,
[Guest]: there's an interesting book by Bill Hayton, The Invention of China, in which he talks about this
[Guest]: concept of race, about 100 odd years ago. And he talks about how Chinese thinkers at that point of
[Guest]: time saw the world as divided among different races, white, yellow, brown, black at the end.
[Guest]: So there is a hierarchy in that persists in your head. And it may not be as obvious and as, you
[Guest]: know, distinct in somebody's head, but you internalize these things over generations.
[Guest]: And I think that exists. I don't think there's a case. I mean, just last year, we saw an example
[Guest]: of this, right? African immigrants living in China and Guangzhou, there was a huge controversy
[Guest]: around racism. And, you know, lots of Chinese diplomats had to go to African leaders in their
[Guest]: countries and sort of get a dressing down. And a lot of these African leaders also put out the
[Guest]: dressing down that they gave the Chinese ambassador on social media to signal to their own communities.
[Guest]: So obviously, racism exists, obviously, that exists. It works in much more subtle ways sometimes.
[Guest]: And I think you will see right, a lot of the times, like just like in India, right, you know,
[Guest]: if you if you have a foreigner who's visiting, and you want to make a snarky comment, you make
[Guest]: it in Hindi, a lot of that would happen there also. So I don't sort of see it as that distinctly
[Guest]: different. But I do see that, you know, in general, depending on where you are, whom you're
[Guest]: meeting, and particularly if you're meeting somebody for the first time, and maybe this is
[Guest]: because women are much more active in the public sphere in China. Right. So and women don't tend
[Guest]: to be as hostile when you meet them first, because the approach is you're selling something and you're
[Guest]: friendly. So my experience, therefore, was essentially meeting people who are generally
[Guest]: very hospitable, hospitable, who are very friendly, who laughed a lot. And again, if you're a good
[Guest]: salesperson, you laugh a lot. Particularly if I'm your customer, you will laugh a lot at my jokes.
[Guest]: And that's what happened a lot with me. So again, maybe that's the power dynamic,
[Guest]: which I'm coming from. And therefore, I felt that it was much more as a trader. But as a
[Guest]: as an employee, I thought that there was a gradation in which I fit in, you know, as
[Guest]: a South Asian, as opposed to a white person. And and again, as the Arabs working in the organization
[Guest]: fit into a different grade, the whites were the highest in that sense. So I think that existed.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't sort of read too much into us being that way. I think we also have our ingrained
[Guest]: biases from generations. But in generally, I think we are also fairly friendly, at least,
[Guest]: again, it all depends on where you come from, who you meet in what context, and all of that.
[Guest]: That's what determines to me whether a person's implicit sort of biases and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: tendencies sort of come to the fore or not. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, all these are,
[Amit Varma]: after all, such impressionistic takes. So let's get back to your personal arc. Why did you decide
[Amit Varma]: to leave then? And when you decided to leave, you didn't come back to Indian journalism,
[Amit Varma]: you didn't give trading another shot, you came into the world of policy, you came to
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila. And thank God you did, because that's how I met you. And that's why you're
[Amit Varma]: on the show now. But how did that that sort of journey take place?
[Guest]: So I got married in 2015. And see, it's just five years, six years, and I still am sort of
[Guest]: going back and saying, thinking about it once. But yeah, I know, I got married in 2015. And
[Guest]: my wife joined me in Beijing. And I think there were two things that were happening. One was that
[Guest]: we were thinking about having a kid. And the challenge was that, you know, I was not as
[Guest]: I was not as comfortable with my own lack of knowledge of the language ability to manage
[Guest]: having a child in that environment, because I wasn't familiar with healthcare as much,
[Guest]: despite having spent a lot of time there. And the idea was, if we, you know, if we are planning a
[Guest]: child, do we want to go back to India, because it might just be easier with family and everything,
[Guest]: and everything, and everything. The second strand that was running was the fact that I was
[Guest]: increasingly reaching a point of fatigue in the organization in CCTV, because I was increasingly
[Guest]: feeling like, I think I've done what I needed to do here, or how much ever I needed to do here,
[Guest]: I've hit a certain ceiling, where increasingly, the environment, which was somewhat free has
[Guest]: become even more controlled. The role that I was playing for the last two, two and a half years,
[Guest]: is increasingly shrinking, because the organization is taking away editorial
[Guest]: discretion from foreigners even more. It wasn't like you had a tremendous amount of editorial
[Guest]: discretion, but you had a say. And on a lot of things, I felt that what I was saying was taken
[Guest]: on board, that was shrinking very rapidly. And that had to do with how the organization was
[Guest]: changing and how the political environment in the country was changing. I was uncomfortable
[Guest]: with some of the things that were done, not in CGTN, but CCTV, which was, say, airing of
[Guest]: confessions of people who are detained. And of course, CGTN was then asked to carry it. I used
[Guest]: to, I remember resisting saying, we don't want to carry this, and you know, not on our platform,
[Guest]: why do you want to carry it? It's, you know, but some of those conversations have started to
[Guest]: eventually grate. And I was reaching a point where I was like, look, I don't think I want to do this
[Guest]: anymore. So that coupled with the sort of personal desire, I sort of felt like it's time for me to
[Guest]: move out, because I valued the relationships that I had built in that organization with the people.
[Guest]: And I was increasingly, and I took a lot of credit to my editor in chief. She was a wonderfully
[Guest]: enthusiastic, energetic woman who worked 24 hours a day, and who never cribbed, who always smiled,
[Guest]: always laughed. And she, I fought a lot with her. And she still had a lot of regard for me,
[Guest]: which I thought was remarkable, because I wouldn't, I would start becoming sour.
[Guest]: And at the end of it, I remember talking to her and telling her that, look,
[Guest]: I'm at a point where I feel I will increasingly fight much more with you, because I don't agree
[Guest]: with even more where we are going. I didn't necessarily agree too much at the beginning,
[Guest]: in the beginning of all of this, but I'm now at a point where I just completely disagree with
[Guest]: everything. So I'm finding it difficult to stay here. And she was kind enough to tell me,
[Guest]: take a month off. You know, I don't want you to leave, take a month off and think about it.
[Guest]: And I said, no, you know, I don't think it'll change in a month's time. So I might as well just
[Guest]: move. And she was fairly good about it. And she said, fine, you know, whenever you want,
[Guest]: whatever you want, serve out your notice period, and you can leave whenever you want,
[Guest]: there's no issue at all. Again, the way the organization treated me, I don't have a bad
[Guest]: thing to say about them. In terms of their priorities. Yeah, I don't agree with a lot of
[Guest]: things. But yeah, but that's where I sort of ended. And again, I moved to India, just to sort
[Guest]: of, I didn't join Takshashila immediately, I moved to Vyond when I came to India. And I spent a year
[Guest]: and a half over there, at which point, I moved away. And I took basically, after we after my
[Guest]: kid was born, we basically decided that and because of changes also in Vyond's editorial,
[Guest]: I didn't feel like I wanted to continue over there. And I moved out of the organization
[Guest]: without a job, basically saying I want to take some time to spend with my newborn baby,
[Guest]: which was much more hard work than I could have imagined, much more hard work than I could have
[Guest]: imagined ever having done. And I think joining Takshashila was something that was during that
[Guest]: break, I think Takshashila was, it was 2017, the Doklam standoff had happened, there was lots of
[Guest]: interest in China. And unfortunately, there are very few Indian journalists in China. So I don't
[Guest]: count myself as an Indian journalist in China, even when I was there, because I would see myself
[Guest]: as an employee of CCTV, but journalists like Sudhirto from Hindustan Times, Anand Krishnan
[Guest]: from The Hindu or back then from India Today, lots of people from PTI, INS. To me, that's the
[Guest]: Indian journalist in China, not people like me. There are hardly any, I think there are four,
[Guest]: you know, three or four. And there's very little information in India about China.
[Guest]: A lot of that is repurposed reportage from Reuters, AFP, whatever. And there's no real
[Guest]: original Indian view that's evolved. Although, like I said, some of the names that I've mentioned,
[Guest]: these guys have done tremendous work. But there's no real, you know, view that's been that's evolved.
[Guest]: A lot of our media conversation is very hollow, very shallow. And I was like, look, in Veeon,
[Guest]: one of my hopes was to try and do that, try and sort of actually get but then again, the nature
[Guest]: of the organization, the way it was evolving, this was not a priority. But when I left it,
[Guest]: I said, I want to sort of spend some time trying to do that. So I was trying to teach develop a
[Guest]: short course, like a 101 to teach. And at that point of time, like I said, because Doklam was
[Guest]: happening, Takshashila had run a one month course with four or five sessions on China.
[Guest]: I knew Nitin Pai from Takshashila from many years ago, I'd written for Pragati,
[Guest]: a magazine that you edited at one point of time, and I'd written for them in 2009, 2010.
[Guest]: So I had familiarity, I had done the Takshashila course in 2014, while I was in Beijing. So,
[Guest]: you know, at least he and I both knew each other briefly. When that course was starting,
[Guest]: I remember in the first day at the first session of the course, Nitin messaged me as one of the
[Guest]: students in the course, and asked me what I was doing. And was I still in China? And I told him,
[Guest]: No, I've moved to Delhi. And he said, Oh, what are you doing in Delhi? I said, No, I've just
[Guest]: taken a career break right now. I was trying to be as nice about it, not saying that I'm unemployed.
[Guest]: I was just saying, I've taken a career break, and I'm trying to focus on my child. And his first
[Guest]: response to me was, Can you change a diaper in 30 seconds in the dark? If you can't do that,
[Guest]: you're not good enough. And I said, No, I still can't do that. And then he said, Well, okay,
[Guest]: look, we're interested in doing something in China. Let's talk after the course. And that's
[Guest]: where the conversation began. And a few months down the road, you know, six, eight months,
[Guest]: six months down the road, three, four months down the road, I started a newsletter on China.
[Guest]: And a few months after that, I joined Takshashila full time to sort of try and set up a
[Guest]: China research unit in the organization, while myself also trying to sort of, you know,
[Guest]: spend time on academic research. I remember, in one of my first few weeks, having a conversation
[Guest]: with, you know, Pranay, Pranay Kotasani, who used to head research that time at Takshashila,
[Guest]: and him telling me that you should write a book. And I was telling him that look,
[Guest]: at present, my mindset is that of a journalist, and a journalist working in television and
[Guest]: digital media, I cannot stay with a story for more than eight hours. You know, for me,
[Guest]: once it airs, it's over, it's gone, I'm looking at the next thing. So you're asking me to stay
[Guest]: with something for three months, six months in my head, a concept, work on it, develop it,
[Guest]: and I'm going to struggle with it. And he was very nice about it. He said, Yeah, yeah,
[Guest]: I totally understand. Take your time. But you know, this is what I need you to do. So just
[Guest]: try and focus on that and settle yourself down to do that. And so the journey from there sort of
[Guest]: began, and it took me a good six months, I think, for that mindset to change. In many ways,
[Guest]: television and digital journalism gives you your your mind is geared towards gratification at 10
[Guest]: o'clock at nine o'clock in the night. Right. And that was no longer the case. So tendency to sort
[Guest]: of drop off, get bored, get sort of uninterested over a period of time, I sort of feared that a lot.
[Guest]: But I mean, I think maybe it's just because I was older, it sort of allowed me to manage and,
[Guest]: you know, as you grow older, you become a little bit more patient. So maybe I'd gotten a little
[Guest]: more patient. But it took me six months to get comfortable with that and get into China related
[Guest]: research, to then sort of spend some time understanding better from an academic point
[Guest]: of view, frameworks of how do you study China? What is the work that a tremendous number of
[Guest]: a tremendous number of people have done to try and study China? And what are the frameworks that they've devised?
[Guest]: How would I look at the India China relationship, partly from an academic point of view, but also
[Guest]: from a policy point of view, which I think is something that's not done enough in India,
[Guest]: on most things, but specifically on this, it's not done enough, because an example of that is
[Guest]: that the current discourse on if India wants to deal with China, it needs to work with America
[Guest]: and whatever, whatever, and the quad and everything, but what should you do with that?
[Guest]: You know, everybody says, yes, we will work with the quad and we will balance,
[Guest]: but what is it that you will do? And what are those? And how will you do it? I think those
[Guest]: are the kind of policy questions which public discourse in India doesn't talk about. And as
[Guest]: I've worked at that, Sheila, my effort has been to now move towards more towards trying to answer
[Guest]: those questions as to what do you do it? How do you do it nuts and bolts rather than the grand
[Guest]: big sort of question. But yeah, but that's been my journey, getting to the Sheila and
[Guest]: over the last three years in the organization, we've done actually quite well to establish not
[Guest]: just one of the sort of premier China studies unit in the country from a policy point of view,
[Guest]: but also now expanding it to a to the broader sort of domain of the Indo Pacific. So we've
[Guest]: now got a new Indo Pacific studies program where we're trying to expand, again, trying to answer
[Guest]: these questions of, okay, so if supply chain resilience is a key part of what we need to do,
[Guest]: how do we do it? And what does it mean? How do we do it? What are the incentives of different
[Guest]: players in this game? What are our interests? And how is what is the mechanism that we need
[Guest]: to set up? How should it operate and try and answer some of those questions over the next
[Amit Varma]: couple of years? You know, the first time I started reading a lot of you was obviously,
[Amit Varma]: when I was editing Pragati and we would carry your newsletter on China, which I don't tire
[Amit Varma]: of telling people is so incredibly good, because not only did you put in an enormous amount of
[Amit Varma]: effort, just getting all those links and all of that, but you weren't merely collating links,
[Amit Varma]: you were giving perspective, there was a narrative to every newsletter. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: there were four or five separate narratives, like, like, it was just so insanely deep,
[Amit Varma]: definitely. I mean, I don't want to embarrass you with flattery, but by far the best writing on
[Amit Varma]: China that I've read, coming out of India and so enlightening. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: your working habits, your work ethic, like number one, I imagine when you come to Takshashila,
[Amit Varma]: certain amount of time as you're looking at all the frameworks, and building your own framework
[Amit Varma]: out of that and how do you look at something and that's where the clarity and the sharp viewpoints
[Amit Varma]: really emerge from. And then there is just what I would call the weekly grind because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I did a blog actively for five years between 2004 and 2008. I do like five posts a day,
[Amit Varma]: 8000 posts in that time. And I and these kind of posts actually seem easy to the outsider where
[Amit Varma]: you're putting together a bunch of links and you're giving perspective and all of that. It's
[Amit Varma]: incredibly hard. And it boggled my mind that you would do this week after week after week.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the deal with that? Tell me a bit about your work ethic. Do you have any insights
[Amit Varma]: on productivity? Would you ever have like writer's block or whatever? And you're just like,
[Amit Varma]: shit, I can't do it this week. Take me a bit through your process doing that.
[Guest]: So I think I have, I mean, it's not writer's block, but there is fatigue. And there are certain
[Guest]: weeks and certain days where you basically end up saying, Look, I don't want to do this,
[Guest]: because I'm tired or, you know, and the anticipation that it's going to take me five
[Guest]: hours to do this, and I don't want to spend those five hours. So you sort of don't want to do it.
[Guest]: But I think that in general, initially, what drove my work in that was just that,
[Guest]: and I bought this idea, right? So when Nitin sold me this idea of doing this newsletter,
[Guest]: I bought the idea and I have to give him credit for basically telling me that whatever the quality,
[Guest]: just keep doing it. And I bought the idea. And I said, Okay, I'll keep doing it, whatever the
[Guest]: quality. And after about two months, what I realized was that my understanding of what was
[Guest]: happening was evolving. You know, I knew much more, along with the newsletter, what we used
[Guest]: to do. And this is I started the newsletter when I was still in Delhi. The newsletter would be
[Guest]: published every Friday, but every Thursday, I had to I would collate most of it. And Thursday at
[Guest]: lunch, I'd have a call with folks in Takshashila, where I would tell them basically what's happened.
[Guest]: So they'd be eating lunch, and I'd be talking and I tell them what's happening in China.
[Guest]: To me, what I realized was, I mean, one in on one of the first calls,
[Guest]: Lieutenant General Prakash Menon, who's the Director of Strategic Studies at the organization,
[Guest]: he asked me a question about, I think about how India can use, how can India counter BRI and
[Guest]: whatever, something like that. And I basically sat there and said, I have no idea. I haven't
[Guest]: read, I haven't thought about it. So I have no idea. To me, I mean, I'd never met the man,
[Guest]: he introduced himself as somebody who had been in the National Security Establishment and everything.
[Guest]: So I was overawed. And I was like, okay, he's asking me this question, I'm supposed to be the
[Guest]: fellow who understands China, and I have zero idea. And I realized that I had not spent time
[Guest]: on the idea. I had not spent time, I had not focused my reading, whatever. But after like,
[Guest]: two or three months, I realized that I could respond to those questions with a certain degree
[Guest]: of certainty, along with a certain amount of information that I had gathered. As time went on,
[Guest]: it was a need for me that if I don't do this, I miss out. So there was a certain degree of
[Guest]: FOMO also, that I don't know what's happening in this week and whatever. And if I'm answering
[Guest]: questions, I don't have enough data, I've not thought it through. So I want to do it even more.
[Guest]: And I think that's what drove me in terms of my work ethic. And I, as I got more comfortable with
[Guest]: format, structure, where do you get information from? How do you source things? It became much
[Guest]: easier, it didn't feel like a lot of work, you know, it feels like a lot of work manually.
[Guest]: But mentally, it doesn't feel like I'm doing so much, you get tired physically. And in fact,
[Guest]: today, I've expanded my work. So today, I do that I on China, every Sundays, I moved from Friday to
[Guest]: Sunday, because from Monday to Friday, I do a separate blog, in which I read the people's daily,
[Guest]: and I put out what's being covered with a little bit of analysis here and there. So it's allowed.
[Guest]: So that tells you a little bit about, you know, once you become comfortable with the space,
[Guest]: you know what to expect and what you're doing, and also comfort with your sources.
[Guest]: In terms of my sort of work ethic of what I do, I work six days a week, I take Saturdays off,
[Guest]: which I usually spend, you know, at home with my kid, mostly trying to sort of, you know,
[Guest]: play football with him. But other than that, even I mean, since this lockdown has happened,
[Guest]: work has increased much more, because you're at home, your environment doesn't change,
[Guest]: weekends have blended into weekdays. So you don't really know where one comes in where the other
[Guest]: goes. So I sort of start usually at eight ish in the morning, I end by about 435. And through the
[Guest]: day, I try to make sure that I keep a track of what's happening in terms of news in China. But
[Guest]: again, once you do this for a certain amount of time, you get very comfortable with certain things.
[Guest]: And you get comfortable by with reading between the lines. So it becomes much more easier to pick
[Guest]: up on certain things. The biggest sort of benefit that I've sort of been able to generate for myself
[Guest]: is my Twitter feed. I mean, to most people, Twitter is a hellhole. To me, it is an absolute
[Guest]: blessing. Because I've been able to cultivate a feed by following x number of people whose work
[Guest]: on China I regard and respect. And I get most of my news via Twitter. But there are many days where
[Guest]: I will have no idea what's happening in India, what's happening in Bangalore, but I know really
[Guest]: well what's happening in China, because that's how my feed is sort of nurtured. And I think it's
[Guest]: really useful. So it allows me to sort of bookmark store things, read things, and keep them down.
[Guest]: I try to read, I'm not a very fast reader, with regard to books, I try to read a book a month,
[Guest]: which is really slow. But I try to do because when I read, I do a lot of underlining, marking,
[Guest]: note taking, I do all of that. And then I sort of try to revisit things. So for me, reading,
[Guest]: therefore may not necessarily be a leisure activity. It's a stressful activity. So it
[Guest]: takes me a month to maybe go through a book most times. But I try to then therefore be picky about
[Guest]: what I'm reading. And again, this is sort of a blind spot where my reading is very China focused.
[Guest]: So I tend to sort of miss out on a lot of other things. But yes, that's how essentially I operate.
[Guest]: My reading is more to understand history, look at frameworks, so history from a popular history to
[Guest]: an academic history point of view, and papers and journal articles to try and understand frameworks
[Guest]: and approaches to research. And the third level is news, which is what I'm doing on a daily basis.
[Guest]: And that to me sort of equips my mind and it's sort of, it's strange. It's been many years now,
[Guest]: but it still stimulates me. It still gives me a rush, it still gives me the excitement. I'm
[Guest]: currently reading a book by Bloomberg's Peter Martin on Chinese diplomacy and the history of
[Guest]: Chinese diplomacy. And it's fascinating because there will be still like a 1030 in the night,
[Guest]: I'll be reading something and I'll burst into the room telling my wife that, did you know this? Did
[Guest]: you know this? So it still excites me that much. And I think till that continues, I'm happy to sort
[Guest]: of keep doing this. Because unless you find that degree of excitement in what you're doing,
[Guest]: it's difficult and it can become very dry, what we do from a policy point of view. So if so for
[Guest]: anybody who's listening, who's interested in the space, I think if you can find it, if you can find
[Guest]: that excitement in discovering these new things about a country, a space, an issue, then you'll
[Guest]: keep to it. But that's how I essentially operate. I mean, I try to shut down work at five so that I
[Guest]: can have some space to myself. Most days, you don't get that as much, but most days, you manage
[Guest]: with a, particularly if you have a, like I said, I mentioned this before, if you have a small kid,
[Guest]: the moment you shut down your laptop, your kid's at the door. So you're sort of playing with him
[Guest]: and you're doing all of that. And that can be stressful and de-stressing depending on how the
[Guest]: day is. So, yeah, but that's how it functions. But in terms of reading, that's how I structure
[Guest]: myself. And that's how I try to upgrade myself because I feel that things move fairly, fairly
[Guest]: quickly. From an academic point of view, China studies has changed so dramatically in the last
[Guest]: decade. And this is also something that happens. It's happened in academia. Subject matter
[Guest]: specializations have become so narrow that, you know, you can't be a generalist and say,
[Guest]: I'm in the world anymore. So you need to cultivate as, you know, if you're a generalist,
[Guest]: you need to have greater breadth or some degree of insight, which is different. Otherwise,
[Guest]: you do hyper-specialization. I don't want to do hyper-specialization because I know it will bore
[Guest]: the life out of me. So I want to remain in that generalist sort of space, use the journalistic
[Guest]: skill that I've had, use some academic learning to try and, at least, you know, be able to
[Guest]: at least then address policy issues rather than be a generalist academic. So that's the sort of
[Guest]: career path that I'm hoping for also going forward that be somebody who's working on policy, but
[Guest]: while remaining a generalist enough to know enough about technology, to know enough about diplomacy,
[Guest]: to know enough about the economy, but not spend your time trying to address that one narrow
[Guest]: question and spend three years to do that. So that's the sort of struggle that I have with
[Amit Varma]: regard to my work. Yeah, you know, this is so delightful, because it seems to me that you've
[Amit Varma]: been fortunate enough to get into this kind of virtuous cycle, where number one, you love what
[Amit Varma]: you're doing, so you do more of it. And number two, as you mentioned, because you're forced to
[Amit Varma]: write as an expert in the process of writing, in the process of doing that hard work of writing,
[Amit Varma]: whatever it is you're writing, you actually become more of an expert over a period of time. You know,
[Amit Varma]: the word generalist actually has almost taken on a pejorative tint in modern times. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: Prem Panicker did an episode with me where he was saying that what's happening in the media is that
[Amit Varma]: journalists are becoming generalists, because there's more and more cost cutting, there are
[Amit Varma]: fewer and fewer of them. And that's obviously in a pejorative sense, where they are just going
[Amit Varma]: a mile broad and an inch deep. But in your case, it seems to me that you are the kind of generalist
[Amit Varma]: who does have, at least from, you know, my vantage point, tremendous amount of deep knowledge of what
[Amit Varma]: you're doing. Like I think most people in their lives will possibly have deep knowledge of just
[Amit Varma]: one or two or three things at the most. And, you know, I'd certainly sort of China there for you.
[Guest]: If I can just sort of clarify on that generalist and specialist thing. So from a journalistic
[Guest]: point of view, I agree with Prem Panicker that, you know, and that's a problem that, you know,
[Guest]: people don't know what they're doing. And they are generalist to that degree. From an academic
[Guest]: point of view, the generalist and specialization debate is very different. Because I think from
[Guest]: an academic point of view, and this is the example that I would give, somebody can be working on
[Guest]: India China relationship, and the challenge of urbanization, which may be common to both.
[Guest]: And you approach that from a broad general perspective, you could then approach that
[Guest]: from the point of view of city development cooperation between India and China and do
[Guest]: a paper on that. And then you could approach that from the point of view of Chinese Indian
[Guest]: methodologies to manage sewage pipeline construction. And, you know, now that the
[Guest]: challenge of academia is it is going to that third, fourth, fifth degree, where you are
[Guest]: answering such a narrow question, which is very useful in some ways, but you're spending two,
[Guest]: three, four years to answer that narrow question. And that's what I don't want to do. I don't want
[Guest]: to answer that narrow question. I am very happy to be a parasite on somebody else's narrow questions,
[Guest]: and try and answer the bigger question and look at the more broader question, because I don't want
[Guest]: to spend those many years answering that narrow question. So while I may understand that narrow
[Guest]: question, and I may want to grab that knowledge and all of that, I don't necessarily want to
[Guest]: answer that matter question. My interest is therefore much more into how at a policy level
[Guest]: should this Indian state and engage with the rise of China? What does the rise of China mean for the
[Guest]: world? So these are much broader academic questions, which you will not find being
[Guest]: answered in university papers, or in journal papers, you know, some of them will, of course,
[Guest]: but not necessarily, because their questions need to be far more defined, and far more narrow,
[Guest]: which is very different from the journalistic, generalist and special education.
[Amit Varma]: I'm so I'm so happy you chose that illustration. Because, you know, getting from urban planning to
[Amit Varma]: sewage, you literally drilled down. So that was nice. So tell me about your book. Now,
[Amit Varma]: how did the idea of the book come about? You know, I wrote a column on when the pandemic started in
[Amit Varma]: April, was that our experience of the pandemic in India, actually revealed and laid bare a lot
[Amit Varma]: of things that are wrong with India, you know, whether it's a dysfunctional state, or whether
[Amit Varma]: it's what's happening with society, and even things which are right with India, actually,
[Amit Varma]: but it brought all of these starkly into relief. And now your book is about a subject that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so deeply as a generalist, but you know, so deeply, and it's very interesting to take
[Amit Varma]: what has happened after the pandemic as a peg for talking about all these other transformations that
[Amit Varma]: are happening. And so, so is that also how you see it? Is that like, is that how you conceptualize
[Amit Varma]: the book? So did it come from this sense of, I want to write about China, and this is a good
[Amit Varma]: way to get into it, because it reveals so much? Or was it that this is an interesting period of
[Amit Varma]: time? So let me sort of recounted chronology in the words of another great Amit. So tell me a
[Amit Varma]: bit about how the book took shape and and how you wrote it so damn fast.
[Guest]: So, I think I'd lean towards the second point that you raised, or the latter point that you
[Guest]: raised, that it was about documenting what was happening to begin with. Actually, I've been
[Guest]: teaching a course on China, which sort of deals with certain fundamental issues, you know, foreign
[Guest]: policy, economics, introductory level, usually for people who are from, who are journalists,
[Guest]: who may be from the armed forces, or people who are just, you know, interested, sort of like a
[Guest]: first step to get in. And I thought that, okay, look, I've got a lot of this stuff written down,
[Guest]: I've got lots more stuff that's a deeper level written down. And I want to talk about that,
[Guest]: but I hadn't conceptualized of a book. In April last year, when the pandemic started in China,
[Guest]: in January, when the outbreak started in Wuhan, I don't think in my mind, I had this idea of a book
[Guest]: or anything like that. I mean, we were still, I was just so taken aback with what's happening.
[Guest]: And my newsletter allowed me to keep documenting every week what was happening in quite detail.
[Guest]: By April, once Wuhan was reopening, I remember, and I mentioned this in the introduction of the
[Guest]: book, there was an article in The Economist, which talked about is China winning because
[Guest]: the world was shutting down, but Wuhan was reopening. That sort of, it struck me what
[Guest]: was happening, you know, in March, you could see this changing, where the Chinese were starting to
[Guest]: give pandemic related advice and aid to the world. And the world was sort of closing down. But China
[Guest]: was opening up again. And that sort of question of is China winning sort of stayed with me for
[Guest]: some time. Particularly, when Wuhan was opening up, there was lots of sort of in the months before
[Guest]: that there'd been a lot of stuff regarding what had happened in the city with regarding
[Guest]: Dr. Li Wenliang with regarding Fan Fang, the diarist, and all of that had stayed with me.
[Guest]: But in April is when I sort of really started thinking when they say is China winning,
[Guest]: what does it really mean? Who is winning? Who is China? What does victory mean? You know,
[Guest]: and that sort of stayed with me for some time. And April, I thought I want to write something.
[Guest]: In May, I wrote the first chapter of the book, which is in the book, as you see it, it's the second
[Guest]: chapter. It's about it's a chapter on heroes and martyrs. And it begins with Xi Jinping standing
[Guest]: with the Communist Party with the leadership of the party, mourning the deaths of all these people
[Guest]: because of the pandemic. To me, I remember this, this happened in April with the mourning happened
[Guest]: in April, I remember watching it. And I remember documenting it for my newsletter. And I kept
[Guest]: thinking this is such wonderful political theatre that's playing out. And I am amazed by people in
[Guest]: India who keep saying that the Chinese system is such, you know, the common refrain in India is
[Guest]: that China has no politics, that's why it's so prosperous. India has a lot of politics. And I
[Guest]: was like, your definition of politics is wrong. China has a lot of politics. And this is political
[Guest]: theatre playing out in front of you. So by the time May hit, I was in my head, I was clear that
[Guest]: I want to at least write about this, you know, this particular what this has meant. And I started
[Guest]: writing the first chapter. And I finished the chapter and I reached a point where I thought,
[Guest]: well, this is interesting, I have lots more to say here. And then I sort of vigorously spent
[Guest]: about a week or so structuring what is it that I want to say, I listed out eight or nine chapters,
[Guest]: I sort of documented them and said, detailed them saying, in each of these, this is what I want to
[Guest]: talk about. And I said, Okay, I'm going to try and approach publishers, I've got a sample chapter
[Guest]: ready, I have structure in my mind. I'm going to reach out and see if there's any interest.
[Guest]: Thankfully, you know, the interest came very quickly. And that sort of because I have a
[Guest]: feeling that if I didn't have have the publisher's interest quickly enough, I would have probably
[Guest]: lagged and said, Okay, I'll do it, I'll do it later. Because with my regular work, it was
[Guest]: stressful to be able to do this, particularly given that we were all in lockdown for the first
[Guest]: time. And it was all very new and all very difficult. The other thing that I started to realize, and
[Guest]: I don't know if it comes across in the book, but I hope it does. But I don't think it does. I don't
[Guest]: think I don't know if it does, is it was very different to sit in India and look at Wuhan in
[Guest]: January and February, you had certain degree of sympathy. But by April and May, you had empathy,
[Guest]: you started knowing what it's like. And I think today after the second wave in India, I have far
[Guest]: more empathy for what's happened, what happened in Wuhan, how tremendously difficult the second
[Guest]: wave has been in India. If I think about what it might have been like for those people in Wuhan who
[Guest]: didn't even know what this virus was, to suddenly have to encounter that,
[Guest]: there's a certain amount of challenge that I mean, I mean, I can be very critical of the
[Guest]: Chinese state. But for the people of Wuhan, you know, one does feel that this must have been
[Guest]: really, really difficult and really, really challenging. And I think that is something
[Guest]: that stayed with me for a certain period of time. But yeah, I mean, that's how I started writing the
[Guest]: book, I sort of did that first chapter felt that this has something here that I want to say,
[Guest]: drew out an outline of all the other chapters that I wanted to write.
[Guest]: Eventually, what I wrote, there were changes from my initial outline. In fact, I think the last
[Guest]: three chapters are quite different from what I had initially thought of.
[Guest]: But yeah, and once I had publishers interest, and once we sort of agreed on the book,
[Guest]: my publishers are very clear and very straightforward saying that, you know,
[Guest]: it's topical, we want to get it out as quickly as possible. So we're going to give you a tight
[Unknown]: deadline and we would like you to I mean, you can pick it but we're going to tell you that we
[Guest]: wanted to be fairly quick. So we came up with a deadline of end of October, I didn't stick to it.
[Guest]: I finished it sometime in the end of November. That was on purpose because
[Guest]: but as I started writing, and like I said, the last few chapters changed.
[Guest]: And with the way the American elections were going, I wanted to capture what was happening there.
[Guest]: So I sort of pushed it further. But it was a fun process because I was documenting something on a
[Guest]: weekly basis in my newsletter, I was trying to then contextualize it in the book, I was trying to,
[Guest]: I sort of saw an opportunity to incorporate all these different frameworks with regard to China
[Guest]: that I had studied from these different scholars from around the world, and incorporate that to
[Guest]: tell a story of China far more engagingly rather than from an academic point of view, you know,
[Guest]: which might sort of not engage people in general. So I saw this as an opportunity to talk about all
[Guest]: of that eventually. But when I began with it, it was just the idea of this is fascinating.
[Guest]: This is something really big that's happening in the world. Something deep is changing all
[Guest]: around us. And I want to document it. That's how I began. But the project, like I said,
[Guest]: as it evolved, I hope that it's as the reader reads the book, it's evolved into something where
[Guest]: it is a quasi journalistic exercise where I'm documenting facts and saying what's happened,
[Guest]: what's not happened, clarifying misperceptions. But I'm also quasi journalistic, quasi academic,
[Guest]: where I'm introducing frameworks for you to contextualize how certain events are, how do you
[Guest]: how do you understand, say, the media environment in China or the political environment in China?
[Guest]: Why is the party resilient? Why is it brittle? And look at that from a partly academic point
[Guest]: of view. Why is it that initially you didn't necessarily see, you know, why did the people
[Guest]: say that there is an information flow problem in the Chinese party system, which led to delayed
[Guest]: reporting with regard to the outbreak in Wuhan? And how do you look at that from an academic and
[Guest]: analytical point of view? And lastly, it's sort of policy analysis, which is sort of towards the
[Guest]: final few chapters, where I'm trying to talk about how what's happened in this last year
[Guest]: is going to shape potentially the next five, 10 years, you know, sort of geopolitics over the
[Guest]: next five, 10 years. And hopefully, as a reader, what you take away is that there is a framework
[Guest]: for you to understand some of these events that may have that may now happen. And I think if
[Guest]: anyone's observed over the last three, four months, particularly the meeting of the quad,
[Guest]: the Chinese and American leaders, sort of the bureaucrats meeting in Alaska and the fight that
[Guest]: happened in Alaska between them, or the G7 summit and the NATO summit and all of that right now,
[Guest]: or the sanctions with regard to Xinjiang and Hong Kong. I hope you can take a framework away of how
[Guest]: do you look at these things. And all of the talk about let's decouple from China, ban Chinese
[Guest]: products, and so on and so forth. You can take away at least how do you analyze these things
[Guest]: beyond what your immediate news break or emotional response may take. And that was my approach
[Guest]: towards the end that I wanted to do that towards the end because again, and I can mention this in
[Guest]: the preface of the book that I'm writing about history that's unfolding in front of me. And
[Guest]: the good bit about that is that I can capture what's happening in lots of vivid detail.
[Guest]: The challenge with regard to that is that it's still evolving. So I don't know in which direction
[Guest]: it might go. So therefore, my hope is for you to be able to document this year and to be able to
[Guest]: analyze, give you frameworks to analyze the next 5-10 years and events that may take place.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I guess in a sense, if your newsletter is like a documenting of the first draft of history,
[Amit Varma]: your book is like the second draft or the one and a half draft as it were. And I enjoyed reading your
[Amit Varma]: book thoroughly without thinking about what category it is in. Is it journalism? Is it
[Amit Varma]: analysis? Didn't strike me. And one of the things I'd like to kind of tell my listeners about the
[Amit Varma]: book is that it doesn't just give frameworks on China, it also give frameworks on narrative
[Amit Varma]: building. It also give frameworks on politics. A lot of the stuff made me kind of think deeper
[Amit Varma]: about what is happening here in India itself. So you know, for that reason as well, I think it's
[Amit Varma]: in many ways, it's an eye opening book. You know, I have to say I admire your work ethic,
[Amit Varma]: because if you're supposed to give something by the end of October, you give it by the end of
[Amit Varma]: November. That's mind blowing, you know, the publisher's interest acting as an imperative
[Amit Varma]: that finish the book, finish the book simply hasn't worked for me. So if my publisher has
[Amit Varma]: gotten so this far into the podcast, and she's like, where are the where are the three or four
[Amit Varma]: books or whatever, because I have actually, you know, got yeses for multiple books, not all of
[Amit Varma]: which I've spoken about, but it simply simply kind of hasn't happened so far, which is a good
[Amit Varma]: note for us to take a break. And on the other side of the break, we'll actually get down to
[Amit Varma]: talking about your book and about China. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In
[Amit Varma]: fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was
[Amit Varma]: active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form
[Amit Varma]: gave me. And I feel I was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day
[Amit Varma]: and was forced to think about many different things because I wrote about many different
[Amit Varma]: things. Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do
[Amit Varma]: head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up,
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Gave me a framework by which I could start thinking about the issue. Now obviously,
[Amit Varma]: I'll link that episode from the show notes and I'd ask all the listeners to go and listen to
[Amit Varma]: that as well. But can you give a brief CliffsNotes summary version of how Chinese foreign policy and
[Amit Varma]: how the way it looks at itself has changed through the last four or five decades since
[Guest]: Mao and you know, landing up all the way to Xi? Right. Um, I think there's been tremendous change
[Guest]: that's happened over the last five decades, seven decades, actually. And even today, this is
[Guest]: currently undergoing a tremendous amount of change. And in fact, I'd say what's happening today
[Guest]: is going to impact the world for the next 1520 years. And we'll get to that as we talk more
[Guest]: further. But sort of just to go back to history, the Communist Party of China, which is celebrating
[Guest]: its 100th anniversary shortly, and when it was formed, it was formed at a point of time where
[Guest]: hundreds of years of imperial rule of the Qing dynasty had collapsed. There had been an experiment
[Guest]: with republicanism, which failed. There had been a return to the imperial rule, which again failed.
[Guest]: And China was poor. There was warlordism. Towards the last few decades of the Qing dynasty,
[Guest]: China had suffered through foreign invasion, starting with 1839, the First Opium War,
[Guest]: and then you had the Second Opium War. Then you had, you know, fighting, you had defeat with the
[Guest]: Japanese, and you had different sort of concessions given to the Germans, to others. And the idea that
[Guest]: China was being sliced up by Western powers. And the reason that it was being sliced up was because
[Guest]: it had fallen back. You know, it had fallen back in terms of technological development,
[Guest]: social cultivation, economic growth, all of that. And a lot of the blame in the 1800s,
[Guest]: when this was happening, was laid on, you know, there were different strands of thought.
[Guest]: One strand of thought was that we've been closed minded. One strand of thought was that there is
[Guest]: deep corruption. One strand of thought is that we've relied too much on, in terms of our governance,
[Guest]: we've relied, we've emphasized too much on literature, literary ideas, these Confucian
[Guest]: ideals of nobility, as opposed to actually cultivating power. And the phrase that sort
[Guest]: of Fuxiang, the phrase that sort of captures this is wealth and power. And that's what we
[Guest]: need to cultivate. And this is a debate that's going on within Chinese society, at least among
[Guest]: the elites in the late 1800s, as you are experiencing this onslaught of, you know,
[Guest]: gunboat diplomacy and Western imperialism, as the Chinese would call it. And what starts to
[Guest]: happen is that there is a movement called the self strengthening movement that's developing.
[Guest]: And there are these green shoots of, you know, let's focus on technology, let's focus on the
[Guest]: Industrial Revolution, let's focus on growth, rather than focusing on imperial glory. And
[Guest]: there is pushback in all of that going on. But yet, China is fundamentally weak, right? It's
[Guest]: really fallen behind. In 1911, the Qing dynasty collapses. Like I said, then you had these decades
[Guest]: of experimenting with different rule. You have a lot of warlordism in China, where different parts
[Guest]: of the country are essentially under the command of different warlords. And there's a lot of
[Guest]: fighting going on. And within this environment, obviously, you have the First World War that
[Guest]: takes place. At the end of the First World War, you have that conversation in Versailles, you've
[Guest]: got that meeting in Versailles. The Chinese are very hopeful that at that meeting in Versailles,
[Guest]: they will get back their concessions given to the Germans, particularly in Shandong. But
[Guest]: there is this underhanded deal that's been agreed upon by the great powers,
[Guest]: and the Chinese don't get back their concessions that were in Shandong, and they were given to the
[Guest]: Japanese. That sort of sparks an angry movement, which is called the May 4th movement of 1919,
[Guest]: which is a student protest revolution, whatever across different parts of the country,
[Guest]: against sort of imperialism. Now, in this May 4th movement, a lot of the people who are
[Guest]: participating are also people who end up leading the Communist Party of China. So and that's an
[Guest]: important thing to keep in mind, because also the same time you're seeing the Bolshevik revolution
[Guest]: happening in Russia. In this entire period of time, what you're seeing also is a deep discussion
[Guest]: among Chinese intellectuals, and quite an anguished discussion about what form of government should
[Guest]: survive, you know, what form of government should we have? And what is the kind of government that
[Guest]: we need to truly acquire this power and whatever. And there is tremendous writing that's happened
[Guest]: here from people like Liang Chaochao, Liu Shun, lots of people whom I would sort of recommend
[Guest]: people go and read. Some of these writers are also quite critical of India, as India is,
[Guest]: and India is used as a negative example, actually, of a society that is deeply divided and, you know,
[Guest]: all of that. And we don't want that. So what you see at the end of all of that is Marxism-Leninism
[Guest]: is seen as one mode of organizing society, which when they see Russia, Soviet Union,
[Guest]: they sort of see it as a revolutionary thing in terms of how, you know, the people who were
[Guest]: oppressed, not privileged, the serfs, have sort of now become the rulers, you know, and the idea
[Guest]: that you can organize and strengthen through that. And that's how essentially the Communist Party
[Guest]: sort of gets formed. So, and obviously, the moment it's formed, it's a very small party.
[Guest]: There's a larger nationalist KMT, which is much more powerful, which has some legitimacy
[Guest]: politically, also, because the leader, Sun Yat-sen, was the first president, essentially,
[Guest]: after the 1911 collapse of the Qing Dynasty, although he was very, he sort of left very
[Guest]: early, he left the scene very early, with the military general Yuan Shikai taking charge at
[Guest]: that point of time. Now, what happens in the 1920s is that the Communist Party and the KMT,
[Guest]: the Kuomintang, they come to some sort of an agreement that we'll work together to sort of
[Guest]: try and get society together and all of that. That agreement collapses as the KMT becomes much
[Guest]: stronger, and it feels it has much more control. Sun Yat-sen dies, Chiang Kai-shek takes over the
[Guest]: KMT, as he's also a military leader. And in 1927, you have a split between the Communists and the
[Guest]: KMT, that united front that they created splits. It was anyway quite tentative, because they were
[Guest]: coming from very, they're sort of, philosophically, these are very two different ideas, governing
[Guest]: governing ideas that sort of colliding. And then you have a long period of a civil war in China.
[Guest]: And that civil war sort of nearly decimates the Communist Party of China. It retreats in what is
[Guest]: called the Long March. Today, that's used as a thing as a Long March forward, but that was actually
[Guest]: a Long March backward, you were retreating into the caves to go and try and figure out what you
[Guest]: can do. And in that throughout that process, a Long March, 10s of 1000s of Communist Party members
[Guest]: died, just because they were constantly being attacked. And they retreated to this place in
[Guest]: Yan'an, where they sort of regroup and whatever. The big break that they get is the is the invasion
[Guest]: by the Japanese, which gets worse as the 30s go on. And then of course, through the Second World
[Guest]: War, that entire period, the Communists work with the KMT. Although the history that they tell you
[Guest]: today is that the Communist Party led the charge against the Japanese, whereas actually, that's not
[Guest]: true. That's not entirely true. The Communist Party played a secondary role to the KMT.
[Guest]: At the end of the Second World War, the civil war between the KMT and the Communist Party sort of
[Guest]: reignites, which by then the Communist Party is in a much, much stronger position. They've got
[Guest]: weapons, they've got battle hardened. Their base has shifted from urban China to rural China. And
[Guest]: this is now a peasant led sort of group. This happened in the 1930s. And this sort of philosophical
[Guest]: shift from urban base to rural base and peasant base was what also led Mao Zedong to assume charge
[Guest]: of the party. And by 1949, they sort of essentially capture power and Chiang Kai-shek flees to Taiwan,
[Guest]: which is where we have now the Republic of China and Taiwan and that sort of continuing tussle
[Guest]: between the two of them. The reason that I said this, that I sort of outlined all of this before
[Guest]: talking about foreign policy, which was your question, is it allows one to understand the sort
[Guest]: of mentality with which these people came into power. These were not nobility who had a sense
[Guest]: of diplomacy, who had a sense of, you know, how things are. These are battle hardened revolutionaries
[Guest]: who had deep commitment, loyalty, belief in hierarchy, with, you know, leadership playing
[Guest]: flowing from top to bottom, a deep sense of siege around them, because you have constantly lived in
[Guest]: that fear. And now they find themselves in a world where they are ideologically aligned, obviously,
[Guest]: to the Soviet Union. They were supported by the Comintern and the Soviet Union over the number of
[Guest]: decades that they existed. They had differences with the Soviet Union. And now they find themselves
[Guest]: in a place where there is this deep nationalistic sentiment about China having been weak,
[Guest]: about the need to grow national power. At the same time, there is an ideological sort of
[Guest]: vision of revolution. And you know, how society has to be organized based on Marxist, Leninist,
[Guest]: and subsequently Maoist thought. So the first few decades of Chinese foreign policy is driven by
[Guest]: these two impulses. The first is, like I said, nationalistic, and the second is revolutionary.
[Guest]: And therefore, you will see a tremendous amount of effort being spent by the Chinese,
[Guest]: not just to consolidate, but by the Communist Party of China, not just to consolidate its hold
[Guest]: on territories like Tibet, Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, and these places, sort of to gather
[Guest]: these territories that they have lost, or they believe that were theirs and they have lost,
[Guest]: which is also what spawned this big conflict with one big part of the conflict with India.
[Guest]: At the same time, you're seeing a desire to export revolution. So you're training revolutionaries
[Guest]: from Africa, from Latin America, from South Asia, whether it's Sri Lanka, whether it's,
[Guest]: you know, Myanmar, wherever else, and you're want to becoming the center of revolution around the
[Guest]: world, which is a time when the Soviet Union is trying to sort of rebalance its relationship with
[Guest]: the US, whereas Mao Zedong is much more active, he wants to do much more. And the Chinese also,
[Guest]: the PRC also splits with the Soviet Union in the 60s. And that again, is a huge sort of change.
[Guest]: I think, though, with those impulses sort of driving Chinese foreign policy, you see a much
[Guest]: more active and aggressive Chinese foreign policy throughout the 50s and 60s, while it's also
[Guest]: finding its feet. And this is evident in terms of its engagement with India, it's sort of finding
[Guest]: its feet, it's trying to renegotiate things, it's trying to negotiate boundary agreements with
[Guest]: so many of its neighbors, because it has 14 neighbors, 14 land boundary neighbors. And it's
[Guest]: also understanding what are the pushes and pulls of power and international politics. In the 60s,
[Guest]: with the launch of the cultural revolution, Chinese foreign policy becomes much more insular,
[Guest]: because society is going through such a tremendous churn, that it's not really looking outside.
[Guest]: It's done some of the tasks of cultivating, you know, in 64, the Chinese carried out their first
[Guest]: nuclear test. So it had developed the bomb, it focused on missile technology, focused on satellite
[Guest]: development, and those sorts of things. It's done some of those key things of cultivation of power
[Guest]: in terms of hard power, in terms of economic power, Mao's in a hurry. So he's trying to create as much
[Guest]: economic power as possible. And he's committing tremendous mistakes. The Great Leap Forward is
[Guest]: one such mistake, where driven by ideology without understanding economics, he ends up launching
[Guest]: what's the Great Leap and the idea of, you know, everybody should have factories in their
[Guest]: backyards, you know, and those sorts of things collapse. So there's a tremendous flux that's
[Guest]: going on in China. But you can see that the impulse is coming from a sense to cultivate national
[Guest]: power. By the 60s, like I said, with the launch of the cultural revolution, China becomes much more
[Guest]: insular, yet it's sort of renegotiating its relationship with the Soviet Union and with the
[Guest]: US. So despite that flux, it manages to engineer that pivot, where it moves away from the Soviet
[Guest]: Union towards the US in the early 1970s, in 1971, with the Kissinger visit, and then the Nixon visit,
[Guest]: and then you start to get some degree of normalcy and Sino-American ties. So these are impulses
[Guest]: that continue. Another impulse was Third Worldism, which is Mao's theory of three worlds, in which
[Guest]: he talks about China sort of being one of the leaders of the third world, again, something that
[Guest]: even India talked about at that point of time. So there are these different sort of impulses through
[Guest]: which foreign policy is being driven. By 1978, so 1976, Mao dies, by 1978, for two years,
[Guest]: there's another internal power struggle after which Deng Xiaoping comes to power.
[Guest]: And he sort of reorients the party. A reform process economically had begun even in the later
[Guest]: years of Mao, where you sort of talked about loosening controls over the economy. In the late
[Guest]: 1970s and early 1980s, this becomes very clear that we are going to do this. There's still a lot
[Guest]: of pushback from the more conservative, ideologically left inclined elements in the
[Guest]: party, from party elders, but sort of the reformers navigate these concerns well. And you start to
[Guest]: liberalize the economy, you start to see opportunities. In early 1980s, Deng Xiaoping
[Guest]: visited the US, and you saw that China's pivot in terms of its foreign policy had taken place.
[Guest]: It was saying we want to grow rich, it was saying we want economic prosperity, and we want to put
[Guest]: disputes that we have on the side. And Deng Xiaoping sort of approach was to cultivate a
[Guest]: favorable balance of power for these objectives. He wanted to sort of get away from that siege
[Guest]: mentality in some ways. Of course, the Tiananmen Square incident of 1989 changes that to some
[Guest]: degree. And for the next three years, there is again a compact that has to be engineered among
[Guest]: the party elders and across through different carders. And by 1992, this again happens,
[Guest]: you again see Deng Xiaoping visited Guangdong province, and which is one of the sort of
[Guest]: manufacturing engines of China. And he talks about economic reform and whatever. And that sort of
[Guest]: that southern tour, as it's called today, gives a direction to the party saying, we are moving ahead
[Guest]: with economic liberalization. You know, to a certain degree, we are moving ahead with,
[Guest]: you know, reform of reducing state control, reducing party state control over the economy.
[Guest]: And that message sort of filters down, and you start to see much more reform taking place,
[Guest]: like I said, in terms of price controls, in terms of factor markets, in terms of new policies with
[Guest]: regard to SEZs, and opening up the Chinese market to foreign investment, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And that then continues for a period of time. So a lot of Chinese policy throughout that time,
[Guest]: throughout the decades from the late from the sort of early 80s, despite that brief interlude
[Guest]: after Tiananmen, through the 90s, the 2000s, is oriented towards economic prosperity,
[Guest]: giving people a better life at home, cultivating economic wealth, and making sure that growth
[Guest]: continues because that's the party's compact, that if we are going to give you growth,
[Guest]: you don't challenge our political authority. And if you challenge our political authority,
[Guest]: we will crush it. We will crush any challenge because the party is supreme. And that continues
[Guest]: in terms of foreign policy, how that plays out is that you keep disputes on the shelves. And this is
[Guest]: evident in the Indian-Chinese relationship, right? In 1988, Rajiv Gandhi visits China,
[Guest]: we put the disputes aside in terms that we don't fight anymore about it. But we say we'll start
[Guest]: talking about them, we'll start building confidence, and we sign a number of agreements over
[Guest]: the next few decades. But the focus is on economic growth. And even India-China trade relationship
[Guest]: grows significantly over the next couple of decades. That starts to change somewhere around
[Guest]: 2007-2008. There are many reasons for it. In my view, one of the reasons is that you see,
[Guest]: firstly, the financial crisis that hits the world, particularly the West, and China finds itself in
[Guest]: a place where it's actually aiding the West. And in the book, if you see also, there's a quote by
[Guest]: the current Vice President of China Wang Qishan to Henry Paulson, where he talks about how
[Guest]: you were once our teacher, and today, you're no longer our teacher. And we don't know what
[Guest]: we can learn from you anymore. And there's a sense of confidence. At the same time, there's a sense
[Guest]: of brittleness, because you're seeing colour revolutions taking place in Eastern Europe,
[Guest]: you're seeing the Arab Spring. And you're seeing sort of protests in Tibet, in Xinjiang, around
[Guest]: 2008-2009. In Tibet, before the Olympics, there was an entire series of monks simulating themselves.
[Guest]: And there's a sense of China's periphery being brittle. And that fear about these colour
[Guest]: revolutions. At the same time, there's a sense of corruption that's, you know, seeping into the
[Guest]: party. I spoke about Jiang Zemin's Three Represents, and rent-seeking, and the fact that the party had
[Guest]: grown unwieldy, and the ideology had become so diluted that it didn't matter to anybody.
[Guest]: So you see that tightening happening at home, and that tightening, which is happening at home
[Guest]: impacts foreign policy. You see, therefore, a much more nationalistic approach. You know,
[Guest]: after Tiananmen, the party had launched a patriotic education campaign in 1994,
[Guest]: you know, by 2008, there are many more people who are graduating, who are coming into the system,
[Guest]: who are educated in a very different narrative, a narrative of, we faced humiliation for a century,
[Guest]: and the Communist Party came and it changed everything. And since then, we've had growth
[Guest]: and these wonderful things, trust in the party and all of that. And this idea of these foreign
[Guest]: devils who try to capture our land, humiliate us and all of that. People start to imbibe some of
[Guest]: those things, right. And so therefore, foreign policy structurally starts to shift to a
[Guest]: much more aggressive posture. And I'll leave it at that. So that's sort of a broad sweep about how
[Guest]: you went from revolutionary and a mix of revolution and nationalism to a mix of economic
[Guest]: growth driven foreign policy to today of foreign policy, which is much more nationalistic.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. And, you know, you mentioned Mao's Great Leap Forward, and that actually contains
[Amit Varma]: one of the finest examples of the seen and the unseen, as it were, that in, you know, in 1958,
[Amit Varma]: Mao decided that, hey, you know, the farmers of China are suffering because sparrows are
[Amit Varma]: destroying their crops. So let's kill all the sparrows. And he gave an order that sparrows
[Amit Varma]: should be massacred, and sparrows were massacred en masse. So that's your sort of seen effect,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, that sparrows are no longer messing up with crops. But the point is,
[Amit Varma]: the balance of the ecosystem was messed up, because sparrows ate locusts. So what really
[Amit Varma]: happened is that locusts proliferated, destroyed China's crops, there was famine, hunger,
[Amit Varma]: starvation, you know, 45 million people died in the three years following that. And this is what
[Amit Varma]: they call the Great Leap Forward. And it also sort of leads me to the irony, which also perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: you know, has a contemporary Indian resonance. It leads me to the irony that Mao was actually
[Amit Varma]: incredibly damn good at one thing, which was counterinsurgency warfare. There's a great book
[Amit Varma]: by David Galula called Counterinsurgency Warfare, which takes a lot of insights from Mao and indeed
[Amit Varma]: Mao's insights on that subject, both as a theorist and a practitioner, is something that Indians
[Amit Varma]: could have learned from while, you know, dealing with Kashmir or dealing with all the other
[Amit Varma]: troubles we have in other parts of India with Maoist revolutionaries, as it were. And the
[Amit Varma]: irony here is that here is a man who was so remarkable at one thing, which in fact got him
[Amit Varma]: to power, but so inept at the other thing, which was governance, you know, no knowledge of economics,
[Amit Varma]: a completely wrong, damaging vision of what the state can do. And, you know, and I look at India,
[Amit Varma]: and I look at, for example, the BJP election machine, and this is, of course, my personal
[Amit Varma]: bias, I should point out to my listeners that Manoj does not necessarily agree with me. But
[Amit Varma]: the way I see it, the BJP election machinery is remarkable, but at governance, they completely
[Amit Varma]: suck. So you know, you would hope that if Modi and Shah got some of that competence, which they
[Amit Varma]: have in winning elections, to actually running the country, we could have been transformed.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we are being transformed, but perhaps in the wrong direction. But that aside
[Amit Varma]: apart, before we get to the meat and bones of your book, per se, and look deeper at Xi's regime, and
[Amit Varma]: how things have changed during that time, a couple of broader questions. One is, give me a sense of
[Amit Varma]: what the Chinese state is really like, because in terms of narrative, they'll talk a lot about
[Amit Varma]: communism and socialism and blah, blah, blah. But, you know, in practice, anything but in practice,
[Amit Varma]: it is this weird kind of capitalism, which is, you know, dictated by the state on top,
[Amit Varma]: where the statism remains, the state is one overwhelming presence, as you found out during
[Amit Varma]: your days in CCTV, its shadows are everywhere. But the economy is something completely different. So
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about what that kind of philosophy is like. The other question sort of
[Amit Varma]: is tell me a little bit about the evolution of the party. Because one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: strikes me from our past conversations, and from reading this book, is the importance of narrative
[Amit Varma]: to them. And earlier, you referred to, you know, the Indian misconception that there is no politics
[Amit Varma]: in China. And that is actually a reasonable misconception to have, because they're just one
[Amit Varma]: party and they rule everything. You know, there's no democracy, there are no elections, why do
[Amit Varma]: narratives matter, elections kaha hai? And yet you see a similar kind of effort put into building
[Amit Varma]: narratives, you know, as you would see in any vibrant democracy in the world, and India at
[Amit Varma]: least is an electoral democracy, if not quite a democracy in a in the larger republican sense,
[Amit Varma]: as we would like in its fullest sense. But so tell me a little bit about one, what is the state
[Amit Varma]: really? It is clearly not a communist country. And you know, thank God for the Chinese that they're
[Amit Varma]: not. And two, what's the deal with the party? You know, like, how does one rise within the party?
[Amit Varma]: Is there any kind of scope for dissent? Or was it scope for dissent, which is now no more there?
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of these two kind of puzzling things.
[Guest]: Okay, so from the point of view of what the structure is like, if you think of it, it's,
[Guest]: there are two different structures, right? So politically, there is a Leninist party structure,
[Guest]: which is hierarchical, top down, which prevails, the party is distinct from the state, of course.
[Guest]: And this is an important distinction, because Deng Xiaoping, when he made when he began his
[Guest]: reforms, he basically wanted to take the party, not out of the state, but he wanted to reduce
[Guest]: the party's influence in the state. And he said, the party's job is politics and ideology,
[Guest]: and the state's job is actually delivering goods and things like that. And he tried to make that
[Guest]: distinction, which, you know, Xi Jinping has reversed in some ways, because he's had the
[Guest]: party cannibalizing state institutions. When you make that distinction, you create space for
[Guest]: efficiency, you create space for outcomes, which are much more better, and which are driven by
[Guest]: beyond more than political calculations. So the party continues in a Leninist sort of structure,
[Guest]: which is top down, you've got the Politburo Standing Committee, which is the heart of power,
[Guest]: seat of power. Xi Jinping is the General Secretary, who is the one person who now commands
[Guest]: most of the power. The idea of the Politburo Standing Committee was that the General Secretary
[Guest]: sort of first amongst equals, today, that's not necessarily the case anymore. And the idea was
[Guest]: that the Premier, who would, you know, would be number two in the party's, you know, the General
[Guest]: Secretary is number one, the number two in the party's standing, Politburo Standing Committee
[Guest]: becomes the Premier, and runs the State Council, which is essentially the government. And that was
[Guest]: a sort of hierarchy that, you know, the General Secretary is responsible for foreign policy,
[Guest]: of course, but also politics domestically, and the party's management and whatever, has most
[Guest]: authority, is the top dog. But the Premier is taking care of the economy predominantly. Under
[Guest]: Xi Jinping, he's sort of taken far more power in his own hands, through mechanisms called
[Guest]: central leading groups to begin with. And once he sort of captured policymaking through these groups,
[Guest]: he's then sort of converted most of these groups into state commissions. So he also captures the
[Guest]: state machinery, or at least operationally, how the state machinery functions. So that's
[Guest]: essentially the structure of the party. It goes from, at the central level, you've got the
[Guest]: Politburo Standing Committee, which then represents the larger Politburo. The Politburo is a smaller
[Guest]: component of the Central Committee. And then you go downwards accordingly. These are the key
[Guest]: institutions, the Central Committee is supposed to be the most powerful, but wielding power is done
[Guest]: by the Politburo Standing Committee. Then you've got state institutions, which is the Parliament,
[Guest]: which is the National People's Congress, which meets every year. Laws are obviously passed through
[Guest]: the Parliament. There are delegates to the NPC, which come from different fields, you know, and
[Guest]: their election process happens from the grassroots level. The NPC system is such that you've got the
[Guest]: National People's Congress, you've got Provincial People's Congresses, and then you have People's
[Guest]: Congresses at lower levels after that of governance. And people get nominated and, you know,
[Guest]: you get elected and you come up eventually. Now, how that process functions is not transparent.
[Guest]: So it's not a case of, you know, you run for elections and you win. At the village level,
[Guest]: at some level, there are elections, there are some sort of experiments with elections,
[Guest]: which are a little bit more public and transparent. But by and large, this process is not
[Guest]: necessarily very transparent. So likewise, in the party system, you've got a mirroring of the state
[Guest]: system, right? So there are party congresses, there are party committees at provincial level
[Guest]: and at lower levels. And again, there is a process of nomination and election and selection that goes
[Guest]: on, which is not necessarily entirely transparent. So at the top, what happens and so Xi Jinping
[Guest]: assumed was declared the heir apparent in 2007. When that took place, how he became the heir
[Guest]: apparent is obviously not public knowledge. We don't know if there was a vote, and he won majority
[Guest]: of the votes. We don't know. What we do know is that and I don't think that happened. Just to be
[Guest]: clear, I was just making a point over there. I think what really happened is that what really
[Guest]: happens is that there's tremendous factional jostling within the party. How do these factions
[Guest]: comprise? How do they come together? Some of these factions may be based on networks of patronage
[Guest]: from the point of view of economically, which sectors you belong to. Some of them may be with
[Guest]: regard to the regions that you have worked in or you've grown up in and the ties that you've
[Guest]: cultivated there. Some of these may be linked to your education and where you've come from.
[Guest]: From family to education to region, all of that plays a role in building your personal networks,
[Guest]: which then sort of play a role in factional politics. Also, from a policy position point
[Guest]: of view, the Communist Youth League usually tends to have a certain view. So therefore,
[Guest]: there is a Youth League faction. The current premier, Li Keqiang, is believed to be a part
[Guest]: of the Youth League faction because he was obviously a member of the Youth League in the
[Guest]: present. Xi Jinping's predecessor, Hu Jintao, was again also a Youth League product.
[Guest]: Xi Jinping, on the other hand, is somebody who spent most of his life in Zhejiang province,
[Guest]: in Fujian province and come and serve in the Northeast, in Shaanxi. And the relationships
[Guest]: that he's cultivated there, along with the time that he spent studying at Tsinghua University,
[Guest]: you will see a lot of the people who subsequently got promoted after Xi Jinping has assumed power
[Guest]: have links to some of these. So you can see what's playing a role in factional politics.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of give and take that happens in that context. That's how essentially power
[Guest]: works at that highest level in China. Now, all of this is very opaque. So a lot of this is sort
[Guest]: of theorizing and looking at some of the things, again, some of the work done by political analysts
[Guest]: who in that brief period where China was much more open, had access to people, had access to
[Guest]: documents, had access to things, who've been able to piece together things. And you know, of course,
[Guest]: also people who've exited the party who've sort of left memoirs and things like that. So you've
[Guest]: got some information, but there's obviously, it's not like it's a system that is so clear that we
[Guest]: know, you know, how processes work. But that's essentially how power works, how the state is
[Guest]: structured. In terms of this argument of communist, capitalist, I mean, the party structure is Leninist,
[Guest]: and it is decided that we will stick to that structure that works for us. In terms of the
[Guest]: economy, the approaches, so the approach from the 1990s till sort of very recently,
[Guest]: was of liberalization, but not necessarily entirely sort of market liberalization. It was
[Guest]: about careful opening up of different sectors, you know, to the outside world, easing of controls,
[Guest]: but at the same time, the other component of reform was improving governance efficiency. So
[Guest]: I might not want to liberalize something, but I just want to make it much, I just want to make
[Guest]: government services much more efficient. So a lot of Chinese reform, when the party talks about
[Guest]: reform, is not about marketization. It's about improving governance efficiency. It's about
[Guest]: cracking down on corruption. It's about making sure that the person at the end of the state who's
[Guest]: receiving that final state functionary, whether it is a marriage bureau, going to the marriage
[Guest]: bureau for a license, whether it's the police, whether it's you know, something else, you know,
[Guest]: for rental, taxation, whatever, efficiency, transparency is increased. Because if you do
[Guest]: that, you will get better performance legitimacy in terms of what you're doing. So the approach
[Guest]: to the economy and to government functioning is in that sense that you want to increase efficiency.
[Guest]: And again, like I said, Deng Xiaoping's idea was get rich. So whatever you did to get rich,
[Guest]: to maximize profit was worth it. Under Xi Jinping, this is changing. This is changing because like
[Guest]: I said, you know, there was these three phases, standing up, getting rich, growing strong.
[Guest]: What we are seeing, what growing strong means, it may not necessarily mean that you need to
[Guest]: get rich. Because it's, you know, and that's how you're seeing in terms, when you see the
[Guest]: crackdown on technology sector in China today, what you're seeing is that being strong means
[Guest]: that the state should also, or the party more than the state, has certain objectives with regard to
[Guest]: national power. You've gotten rich, you've created capacity as a private entity, whether it's Alibaba,
[Guest]: Tencent, whoever, your capacity must now service our needs for power. And this is how we define
[Guest]: what we mean by cultivating power. If that means sacrificing efficiency, if that means sacrificing
[Guest]: profit, if that means sacrificing your entrepreneurial zeal, so be it. And if you don't do it, we make
[Guest]: you do it, which was not the case, five, seven, eight years ago. So that's a change that's happening
[Guest]: with regard to the economy also. So if one wants to call that a Leninist sort of control on the
[Guest]: economy, maybe you can, but I mean, it's difficult to sort of attach these labels, but it's no longer
[Guest]: as freedom oriented, economic freedom oriented as it was maybe say 10 years ago. So that change is
[Guest]: happening. That's how I would sort of look at the structure. No, just thinking aloud, it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that most of the time being strong, getting rich, they should go together. Like, you know, your
[Amit Varma]: colleague, Nathan says that the best foreign policy is economic growth, you know, a rising GDP,
[Amit Varma]: which is, of course, true. I think the distinction here is that I think if China got rich, it would
[Amit Varma]: be stronger. But it's a party getting stronger, which is kind of working at cross purposes. So
[Amit Varma]: here is a party in the state kind of working at cross purposes. The other question that I asked,
[Amit Varma]: which I'm still a little confused about is, your book details beautifully how there are two
[Amit Varma]: directions in which narrative is being pushed. One is the outside world, and the other is within
[Amit Varma]: China itself. And you've also, you know, been using the phrase under Deng, the thing was that
[Amit Varma]: there was a separation, and the party would just do politics domestically. But what is politics in
[Amit Varma]: a one party system? Why do they need an internal narrative when they don't need to win elections?
[Amit Varma]: Or is there a sense that their hold on power may not be something that they can take so strongly
[Amit Varma]: for granted? Did Tiananmen, for example, or whatever happened afterwards, kind of shake
[Amit Varma]: them up a little bit? So what's the deal with that? Why do they even want an internal narrative
[Amit Varma]: if they've already kind of, if they are in power, and they're going to stay there?
[Guest]: I'll ask that. But let me just sort of add to the point that you spoke about, you know,
[Guest]: the party wanting to be strong. So the way I look at it is this, right? I mean, if you look at the
[Guest]: West right now, or even India today, there is a struggle going on between big technology and
[Guest]: governments, whether it's in the US, whether it's in India right now. And the struggle is
[Guest]: essentially about who wields power. The argument is that big tech has become far too powerful to
[Guest]: dictate. And it's not just about dictate, but it's also about an organizational ability,
[Guest]: the ability to challenge the political clout of a unit. The party does not want that to happen.
[Guest]: So that's one part of its motivation in terms of business background that's taking place.
[Guest]: The other part is that profit when you see profit, you know, if I was a firm that's developing,
[Guest]: that's working on artificial intelligence, intelligence technology. Now, I know that
[Guest]: spending my time and money on doing core fundamental research, I will spend 10 years,
[Guest]: maybe I will achieve a breakthrough, and maybe I can license that or whatever, and you know,
[Guest]: make money off that. But I'm not really getting rich easily. But if there is core fundamental
[Guest]: research that's been done, I can use that and I can create a product whereby which when Amit
[Guest]: walks into the room, the air conditioner recognizes his face, and automatically switches to 23 degree
[Guest]: temperature. I sell stuff, I make money. But from the strategic point of view of the state,
[Guest]: it's useless. From for an enterprise, it's really great, you know, you're making money and whatever.
[Guest]: And from a state's point of view, it's like, okay, great, you're giving people a better life,
[Guest]: but and you're contributing much more to the taxes because of your sales and revenue, whatever.
[Guest]: But it's useless in the grand scheme of things. What Xi Jinping is saying is that, look,
[Guest]: I don't want you to just do that. I want you to direct all these wonderful resources that
[Guest]: you've gathered and captured because of all the policies that we created that you can generate
[Guest]: all this wealth into strategic domains. And the market is not doing it for me.
[Guest]: So I'm going to force you to do it. Because I feel that this is going to be critical for my
[Guest]: political power in terms of my competition with the West, but also at home, given I can cut you
[Guest]: down to size because you know, you guys can become too big for your shoes. So I think that's
[Guest]: one dynamic that's at play was that's shaping this. The other point in terms of why is it that
[Guest]: a narrative matters to them? Look, I mean, there is tremendous politics within the Communist Party.
[Guest]: When Xi Jinping rose to power, or when he was about to assume the position of the General Secretary,
[Guest]: just that year, earlier that year, you had this case of the leader of Chongqing, Bo Xilai,
[Guest]: you know, this really incredible series of events with regard to his wife, British expat and
[Guest]: everything. And Bo Xilai eventually gets taken down on corruption and all these other charges
[Guest]: and is now spending his life in prison. But Bo Xilai at one point of time was seen as a serious
[Guest]: rival to Xi Jinping. Of course, Xi Jinping had won the stakes in 2007, so much before 2012,
[Guest]: which is when he took charge. But Bo Xilai was sort of leading this populist, somewhat neo-Maoist
[Guest]: model of, you know, governance. And again, something that we need to realize that in the
[Guest]: Chinese system, the central government or the central leadership has tremendous authority,
[Guest]: but so do the provinces and cities. And the fear that the party has is that leaders at these levels
[Guest]: can cultivate fiefdoms, which can then lead to challenges within the party. And that happens a
[Guest]: lot. And the Bo Xilai case is one example of this, where there was a fiefdom that was being
[Guest]: cultivated. There was also a case of an ideological confrontation with regard to what was accepted in
[Guest]: the party with regard to where economic policy should go. You know, economic policy was going
[Guest]: in the direction of quote-unquote reform and opening up, which was that you will have greater
[Guest]: marketization, you will have greater liberalization, you will open up to the world and all of that.
[Guest]: Whereas there is a strong current in society also, which is against this. So there's a strong sort
[Guest]: of left-leaning current in society, which for ideological reasons may not like this sort of
[Guest]: opening up. But there is also other currents which talk about, well, all these big state-owned
[Guest]: enterprises and foreign companies and everything else. I mean, even if you remove the foreign
[Guest]: component of it, but just big Chinese state-owned enterprises, you've polluted our waters, you've
[Guest]: polluted our air, you've polluted our soil, and people push back, there is land grabs that happen
[Guest]: and people push back. So that's the kind of politics that's happening in society. And leaders
[Guest]: at different level will tap into that politics. Because at the end of the day, you do want to be
[Guest]: legitimate in the eyes of the people. Because if you're not legitimate, there will be revolts.
[Guest]: So the narrative setting also partly happens for these reasons, where you're trying to sort of
[Guest]: take together these different currents in society. You're trying to placate some,
[Guest]: trying to move with some, you're trying to then frame policies to address some of these concerns.
[Guest]: At the same time, the politics is taking place, because there are different pushes and pulls and
[Guest]: political motivations at different levels of leadership in the party. So therefore,
[Guest]: there is tremendous politics. And the narrative is required because you want to emphasize reasons
[Guest]: for the party's legitimacy. Now, what's happened is that over the years, the narrative used to be
[Guest]: about being rich, providing opportunities, opening up, China becoming much more, China changing quite
[Guest]: rapidly, and so on and so forth. Today, what's happened under Xi Jinping is that the narrative
[Guest]: has shifted from that positive opportunity-based narrative to two broad things. One is a
[Guest]: nationalistic narrative, which is comprising of things like, look, our system works, and our
[Guest]: system is excellent, and our system delivers for us. So have faith in that system. The other is,
[Guest]: look, these foreigners are envious of our system, because it works and look at theirs,
[Guest]: that's collapsing. And the COVID case study, which is part of the book, essentially talks about that,
[Guest]: that the Western system has failed to deliver. And the third part of that particular narrative
[Guest]: of nationalism is about, we have been wronged historically, and today we are reclaiming our
[Guest]: place. And those are the three narratives that you're telling society, which is very different
[Guest]: from the narrative of opportunity that you were giving out in the 1990s, 2000s, which was about
[Guest]: China being this place of prosperity. The other sort of meta narrative that's there, apart from
[Guest]: the nationalist narrative, is one about livelihood. And this Xi Jinping has done really, really well.
[Guest]: He understood after that particular, after particularly what was happening with Bo Xilai
[Guest]: and the new Maoist movement, he understood the left pushes and pulls that were taking place.
[Guest]: And he's wary of that, right? He's wary of that particular strand of left movement,
[Guest]: growing powerful. And why I say that is because over the last five, six years,
[Guest]: you would have seen, and even today, you will read reports about neo-Maoist agitators,
[Guest]: protesters, students being detained ahead of the party centenary. And that's because you're not
[Guest]: comfortable with that strand of thought, because that challenges your fundamental economic policy
[Guest]: of trying to keep China open as a trading nation. But at the same time, he's saying,
[Guest]: look, there are genuine concerns that these guys are raising. Pollution is one, financial risk is
[Guest]: one. You don't want contagion in banks, it hurts people's livelihood, apart from whatever systemic
[Guest]: impact it has, which is tremendous. But the challenge will be, what happens when there's
[Guest]: a run on banks? It impacts political stability. What happens when pollution becomes that much of
[Guest]: an issue that people revolt? What happens when people's health is a huge issue and we don't
[Guest]: address it? And we don't provide when medicines are incredibly expensive and people can't access
[Guest]: doctors. Where does all this boast of our performance go away? So he's trying to therefore
[Guest]: address livelihood issues. And therefore, in 2017, he sort of changed, in very Marxist terms,
[Guest]: what is the principal contradiction of society? And that contradiction, according to him, is
[Guest]: unbalanced and unequal growth today, and the desire for a better life. So he's oriented his
[Guest]: policy towards trying to also address livelihood issues while trying to maintain some degree of
[Guest]: growth. And I think that just tells you why narrative matters, because legitimacy matters
[Guest]: to the party. And for the party, while power does flow, as Mao said, through the barrel of the gun,
[Guest]: and you want to keep control of the PLA, you also want legitimacy through performance. And you want
[Guest]: legitimacy through history, because that's where your legitimacy will sustain. For the Communist
[Guest]: Party, again, very different from say, places like India or the US or the West, or democratic
[Guest]: countries, where the government will go, but the system sustains. Here at the party goes,
[Guest]: the system collapse. So for the party, that is existential. So therefore, you need this narrative.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. And in this whole Wuhan narrative, also everything that has happened,
[Amit Varma]: the most noticeable thing is how the Chinese Communist Party, in a sense, focuses on narrative
[Amit Varma]: as much as governance, if not more than governance, I mean, also governance, but narrative
[Amit Varma]: is such an incredibly important part. And it flows out of how she has sort of redefined this
[Amit Varma]: narrative, like you quote, in one of the many frameworks you present, you quote Deborah Stone
[Amit Varma]: from her book Policy Paradox, where she talks about her policy stories are like fairy tales,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they'll use literary and rhetorical devices, they'll have good guys and bad guys,
[Amit Varma]: you know, even if the bad guy is a virus, and so on and so forth, which also kind of speaks to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the German theorist Karl Schmitt's theory of how in politics, you always need an
[Amit Varma]: enemy, there always has to be an other, you know, which could be a virus, which could be
[Amit Varma]: anyone who's anti national, for any reason, you can have subcategories within that. And that,
[Amit Varma]: of course, is as much an Indian reference as a Chinese one. Now, in your last episode with me,
[Amit Varma]: you also spoke about discourse power, which is something that she has sort of developed,
[Amit Varma]: which is a narrative different from his predecessors, and which also has a certain
[Amit Varma]: edge to it. So tell me a little bit about that and how that manifests itself during this post
[Guest]: Wuhan time. Right. So I think if you look at the idea of discourse power, it's not something which
[Guest]: is unique or new from a Chinese point of view. But it's something that's interesting to be studied
[Guest]: because, and I'll sort of frame this firstly in the context of if an individual is given a choice
[Guest]: that you can stay in X or Y kind of society today, most of us and if there is a proposition that is
[Guest]: being brought by different countries, most of us would err on the side today of what can loosely
[Guest]: be called, you know, that Washington consensus, you know, the American compact of free markets,
[Guest]: liberal economies, political representation, and things like that, political participation,
[Guest]: you know, you know, prosperity, not just economically, but also politically is in
[Guest]: from a lively point of view, all of that. Now, the Chinese are essentially looking at that,
[Guest]: and they're saying, we have developed a lot of hard power, but the narrative that we are
[Guest]: offering to the world, you know, the narrative that the Americans are offering to the world,
[Guest]: or they have offered to the world, and based on that, they've also shaped institutions.
[Guest]: So for instance, the narrative on human rights, we have a when when you use the word human rights,
[Guest]: we have a certain conceptualization in our head about limiting the state's ability to coerce and
[Guest]: use force about individual liberty, individual dignity, and all of that. Now, the Chinese are
[Guest]: saying, look, that can be fundamentally problematic to us, because that doesn't sit well with the
[Guest]: party's governance model. And it doesn't necessarily even fit well with in some of
[Guest]: their conceptualization with how the party feels society, social values are in China,
[Guest]: and maybe in other parts of the world also. And we see this conflict on human rights with India
[Guest]: and the West also. So they're saying, look, there is a reason why there is legitimacy to that
[Guest]: argument that they are saying, you know, that the Americans have made, it's backed up by their hard
[Guest]: power, you know, it is after World War Two, that they had the hard power, and they had the ability
[Guest]: that they could create these systems and whatever. But also, instinctively, over time, there is a
[Guest]: certain legitimacy to that argument that they have given, we need to challenge that legitimacy.
[Guest]: Because we have a proposition too. And to be able to make that proposition viable for the world,
[Guest]: not necessarily to proselytize, not necessarily to sort of do missionary work, but to be able to
[Guest]: create space for ourselves to exist without pressure from the West, we need to make our
[Guest]: proposition viable. Now, that's essentially where you're cultivating discourse power,
[Guest]: where you're talking about yourself and your system, you know, and you're creating a certain
[Guest]: degree of legitimacy. If you look at the discourse on human rights today, the Chinese have made some
[Guest]: inroads, the fact that even say the Human Rights Council in the UN has sort of diminished in
[Guest]: authority increasingly, and we read this report, or Saudi Arabia elected chairperson, whatever,
[Guest]: from the Chinese point of view, they started to think about how do we make this argument
[Guest]: internationally? Firstly, what is the philosophical argument that we will make? What are the tools
[Guest]: that we need to make this argument? And how do we then go about making this? So at a philosophical
[Guest]: level, the view was, if we are saying that we are a different system, and our system has equal
[Guest]: legitimacy, what is our system? How is it different? You know, and you need to make this argument,
[Guest]: not just for the outside world, but also for your own people. And in the book, I document how
[Guest]: even before Xi Jinping, when Hu Jintao was leaving power, he talks about something called
[Guest]: core socialist values. And there are these 12 different values which come out and Xi Jinping
[Guest]: sort of takes that and he says, yes, we need to use core socialist values. So the first sort of
[Guest]: process is to create your own system and give it some lifeblood. How do you do that? You do that
[Guest]: firstly, with how your society is organized, how the economy is organized. And that I like I've
[Guest]: said, that's changing, right? The parties assume a greater role, the idea that entrepreneurs must
[Guest]: be patriotic, that being a key component of it. Now, in India, we don't make that argument that
[Guest]: entrepreneurs must be patriotic. Although some sections of society may make that argument,
[Guest]: but we don't systematically. In the US, we don't make that argument. The Chinese are saying that's
[Guest]: our system. Likewise, when you're using these core socialist values, these socialist values are
[Guest]: sort of categorized based on national social individual. So where you categorize a certain
[Guest]: value impinges on how say the law will approach an issue. So if freedom is an individual value,
[Guest]: but at a social level, it's not a value. So great, you can be free at your home. But at social level,
[Guest]: the law will not treat your freedom as more important than social benefit. Whereas in India,
[Guest]: we will see if we make the case that, you know, my freedom to express myself is much more important.
[Guest]: And we see this push and pull in India every day, right? My freedom to have, you know, a
[Guest]: noisy environment is much more important than somebody's freedom to dance outside or whatever,
[Guest]: or to play music and have a party, you know, and that push and pull of individual freedom
[Guest]: versus social obligation. In China, they're saying that under the under these core socialist values,
[Guest]: with this example of freedom and social freedom being an individual value, at a social level,
[Guest]: freedom is not significant. So if the majority is benefiting, it's okay for your freedom to be,
[Guest]: you know, to go away, it's fine with us. And that then bleeds into legislation. And there's
[Guest]: a paper that I cite in the book by Delia Lane and Susan Travis. They do a phenomenal job of
[Guest]: documenting how Xi Jinping has gone about doing this, which is where you're constructing your
[Guest]: own system. And you're saying, okay, now these are the values of our system. Now you take that
[Guest]: proposition to say, to your society, firstly, make them sort of buy it. And under that, I think Xi
[Guest]: Jinping, again, takes from Hu Jintao, Hu Jintao spoke about three confidences that we must have
[Guest]: confidence in the socialist theory, system and path. And Xi Jinping says, we must also have
[Guest]: confidence in our culture. So he then sort of draws from Chinese culture and history,
[Guest]: again, shaping legislation and shaping the environment, governance environment.
[Guest]: And again, patriotic entrepreneurs is one part of it. So when he quotes patriotic entrepreneurs,
[Guest]: he talks about the Qing dynasty and some entrepreneur at that point of time who did
[Guest]: this and who did that and whatever. So he's setting benchmarks for how businesses should
[Guest]: also approach. The next part is you cultivate your tools to propagate these ideas. So in your
[Guest]: society, you're implementing them, you're selling them through your media, you're selling them
[Guest]: through social media, you're selling them through other means, through your governance models,
[Guest]: and so on and so forth. Internationally, you're seeing that look, we have no media credibility.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, if I'm going to tell you, you get your news unbiased from CCTV or from Xinhua
[Guest]: from People's Daily, you're not going to do that you're going to get unbiased news as unbiased as
[Guest]: it can be from maybe the British Broadcasting Corporation from CNN from other places,
[Guest]: whatever. And the credibility that an AP, AFP, BBC, whatever enjoys is far greater than any
[Guest]: what a Chinese agency would enjoy. And the narrative that these agencies set is very
[Guest]: different, right? So Xi Jinping will be strong man, hardline, you know, dictatorial, whatever.
[Guest]: But you will not hear Emmanuel Macron be defined as radical, strong man, whatever. So there are
[Guest]: certain narratives that media organizations are setting. And the Chinese thing, look, we want to
[Guest]: compete with that. Because we feel there is a competition that's going on for people's minds,
[Guest]: and we can compete in that space. So they cultivate these tools with regard to
[Guest]: how do you make your media narrative much more attractive. Conventionally, communist narratives
[Guest]: have been really dry, boring, go through reams and reams of nothing to find one useful thing,
[Guest]: because they are very polemical. So you end up, they say, no, we need to change. So you try to
[Guest]: cultivate new media tools. You're trying to invest in media abroad, under the sort of belt and road,
[Guest]: they've done a tremendous amount in terms of investing in media abroad. You're trying to
[Guest]: provide Chinese media coverage of China to be able to do that. So you're using all different
[Guest]: tools to cultivate that power. Another key component of this is to try and have a greater
[Guest]: say in international organizations, whether it's the UN, whether it's the WTO, whatever.
[Guest]: Basically, you're making the argument saying, particularly in say, the WTO or the IMF,
[Guest]: you're saying, we are a bigger player, we need bigger, we need a bigger say here, you know,
[Guest]: we are footing in far bigger amount of the bill. At the same time, you're setting up alternate
[Guest]: institutions like the AIIB, you're empowering an existing institution like the Shanghai
[Guest]: Cooperation Organization. So you're doing all these things to be able to have far greater presence,
[Guest]: far greater influence, far greater say, because you know, today, you're in a competition with the
[Guest]: West, but also the same time, your interests have expanded, you are no longer limited to your
[Guest]: territory or just your periphery. Today, China is a huge player in Latin America, in Africa,
[Guest]: in South Asia, in Europe. And if your interests are expanded, you need to influence ideas and
[Guest]: thoughts over there. And they saw that very early on as something that's happening. So firstly,
[Guest]: from a defensive point of view, to the sense of anxiety that existed with regard to
[Guest]: color revolutions, economic problems, and all of that, and parties legitimacy, to secondly,
[Guest]: selling the idea of why your system works and is good for the Chinese people to the Chinese people.
[Guest]: And thirdly, to have this sort of competitive dynamic with the West, which again, supports
[Guest]: your domestic narrative, you know, because if you can go back and say, look, these 70 countries are
[Guest]: supporting us on Xinjiang, whereas the US has 15 countries are supporting them. Clearly, we are
[Guest]: right to make those sorts of cases. They've sort of systematically gone about cultivating sources
[Amit Varma]: of strength to do that. It is all very fascinating. And I found that bit very interesting reading
[Amit Varma]: about the 12 core socialist values as it were, and how there are all these nice sounding things
[Amit Varma]: like freedom, equality, justice, democracy, rule of law, but you look a little closer,
[Amit Varma]: and they're not really there in practice, that individual freedom is subservient to the good of
[Amit Varma]: society. So therefore, for all practical purposes, you can just use the good of society as an excuse
[Amit Varma]: and crush individual freedom, which is, of course, a communist way. Anyway, I was also struck by one
[Amit Varma]: of the core elements of the narrative here, which is this suspicion of Western values. You know,
[Amit Varma]: you speak about how in 2013, she delivered a speech to new members of the CCP Central Committee,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, led to something called document number nine, where he speaks about seven false
[Amit Varma]: ideological trends, position and activities. And I'll quote you, you're right quote,
[Amit Varma]: these included the structure systems and processes of Western constitutional democracy,
[Amit Varma]: the nurturing of a civil society premised on individual rights, and a Western conception of
[Amit Varma]: values, such as freedom, democracy and human rights being regarded as universal, with the
[Amit Varma]: aim to supplant the core values of socialism, stop code. And this is also noise that I've heard in
[Amit Varma]: India from both the BJP and a member of the Aam Aadmi Party once, you know, replied to one of my
[Amit Varma]: tweets somewhere talking about how these are all Western values, and they don't apply to us and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. I forget the exact context, but you hear similar kinds of talk. And in fact, the whole
[Amit Varma]: narrative thrust of Xi, especially as you've described in the book, post the beginning of
[Amit Varma]: the pandemic feels very similar to what is the case here, like, number one, you diss Western
[Amit Varma]: values, you diss the sort of elite liberals who bring those values here. Number two, you talk
[Amit Varma]: about nationalism and how we will fight this together. And you give folksy wisdom, like
[Amit Varma]: recently our Prime Minister spoke about, you know, how COVID was such a problem, but we coped because
[Amit Varma]: we had yoga. So there seem to be all these similarities. And what I'm also kind of struck
[Amit Varma]: by, which is a really amusing drama is that what happens at the local level in Wuhan is that there
[Amit Varma]: are these whistleblowers, there are these eight doctors and whatever who talk about what's going
[Amit Varma]: on, one of them takes a picture of an ambulance, which has eight bodies, which has a bunch of
[Amit Varma]: bodies piled up in it. And immediately they're all sort of taken into custody, they are reprimanded,
[Amit Varma]: they get into trouble, and all of that happens. And then after a month or so after a few weeks,
[Amit Varma]: the central government kind of steps in, and it says, No, these are common people. These guys
[Amit Varma]: are our heroes. And the main whistleblower doctor among them, you know, happened to die.
[Amit Varma]: And these guys then build a narrative where they're like, No, these are our heroes. We are
[Amit Varma]: all fighting this together. We all have to bang thalis. Okay, he didn't say bang thalis, that's
[Amit Varma]: from a neighboring country. But we all have to fight this together, our doctors, our medical
[Amit Varma]: workers, blah, blah, blah. So it's almost this folksy thing of we will fight this enemy together.
[Amit Varma]: What I also found amusing was that she just disappears for the first few weeks. As you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out that this was rare, the media would constantly report on his activities, what he's
[Amit Varma]: doing, who he's dating, okay, perhaps not that, but the speeches he gives and all of that. And he
[Amit Varma]: just disappears for a while, till the crisis blows over. And then he comes into the scene.
[Amit Varma]: And then he says that, Oh, look, you know, we fought it together, you the common people and
[Amit Varma]: me or loving leader. And that's sort of the whole narrative, which is interestingly,
[Amit Varma]: what's happening here as well. In fact, brief digression, you know, I was going to write a
[Amit Varma]: newsletter post, I should probably do it before this episode comes out on what Narendra Modi and
[Amit Varma]: homeopathy have in common. Can you guess? Apart from the obvious one of not not being effective
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. No, it's it's actually regression to the mean, right. So a lot of people think
[Amit Varma]: homeopathy works not just because of the placebo effect, but because a lot of with a lot of
[Amit Varma]: diseases, especially things like the common cold, there's a regression to the mean, it gets better
[Amit Varma]: on its own. But if at the peak of your discomfort, you take the medicine and then you get better on
[Amit Varma]: your own, you will ascribe causation to the medicine. So similarly, what our Prime Minister
[Amit Varma]: has done is he has now landed up and taken credit for having fought the second wave successfully,
[Amit Varma]: when the point is all waves regress to the mean, right? In the worst case scenario,
[Amit Varma]: the second wave would have regressed to the mean with everybody dying, but whatever all waves
[Amit Varma]: regress to the mean. So you know, to then say causation and then say that, hey, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we solved it, and it was my resolve and blah, blah, blah, seems a little dodgy to me. And that
[Amit Varma]: seems to be exactly what she kind of did. And it strikes me that the local government and by the
[Amit Varma]: way, the party people there were all sacked and made the scapegoats and all that. And it seems
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, when the thing happened, they didn't know what the hell to do. So they were
[Amit Varma]: like, let's just stop the bad news from going out. And then she decides to take over narrative
[Amit Varma]: control. So is this an accurate summation of all the elements that go into building this kind of
[Amit Varma]: narrative where there is this nationalistic pride, there is a suspicion of Western values,
[Amit Varma]: which come from outside, especially inconvenient Western values like freedom, and so on, you know,
[Guest]: what would you add to that? So I would say that, look,
[Guest]: there is obviously deep suspicion, I think, because partly because the party also feels that,
[Guest]: you know, fundamentally, those values, if they shape society, they will sort of limit the party's
[Guest]: level of control over society. And I think that's something that's unacceptable. And that's been a
[Guest]: red line from, you know, even Deng Xiaoping's time before Tiananmen Square. And in fact, that
[Guest]: crackdown on Tiananmen Square was the place where the party was basically saying, look,
[Guest]: the primacy of the party is non-negotiable, the rest of it we can talk about. And I think
[Guest]: even today, you will see that. Under Xi Jinping, I think partly you can see that, and I document
[Guest]: this in the book, right, that there is tremendous change that's taking place in 2008-2009.
[Guest]: Internal protests in Xinjiang, Tibet, the unwieldy nature of the party, frustration with
[Guest]: corruption, unmooring of society in some way, because, you know, these families with one child,
[Guest]: children growing up, some having tremendous wealth, totally unmoored socially, you're seeing
[Guest]: these strange sort of, you know, rich brat crimes sort of things that are taking place.
[Guest]: You're seeing a lot of corruption, you're seeing a lot of frustration with corruption,
[Guest]: and you're seeing essentially, and that's why at the same time you see, and people have
[Guest]: documented, Ian Johnson has documented this, that society, therefore, is also looking at
[Guest]: looking at more for religion, because you need something where you feel more to society,
[Guest]: you know. And I think that what Xi Jinping, when he comes to power, he sees a party which is
[Guest]: lacking discipline, which is struggling, and Hu Jintao in his speech just before he leaves power,
[Guest]: says that corruption is a real, real critical issue for the party that needs to be addressed.
[Guest]: And when Xi Jinping comes to power, he basically starts to gradually
[Guest]: streamline everything from his point of view. If you increase control, you maintain stability.
[Guest]: And that's what we've seen over the last seven, eight years of his power, you know, his reign so
[Guest]: far. It's also accompanied with obviously a cult of personality that he's built, which, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, you look at it cynically, and you can say, of course, this is one man putting himself
[Guest]: above everything else. You look at it from his point of view, he can make the argument that look,
[Guest]: I needed to gain control, because you need to whip local governments in shape so that they
[Guest]: can actually deliver on priorities. Like in China, and unlike, say, the West,
[Guest]: if you do a public polling of, you know, support for government, what you will see is that there's
[Guest]: lots of dissatisfaction at local government levels, tremendous satisfaction at central
[Guest]: government level, which is the other way around in, say, the US, where there's lots of satisfaction
[Guest]: at the local government level, and dissatisfaction at the federal level. But this sort of informs
[Guest]: also how the central government operates, where it says that we need to get these guys at the
[Guest]: local level to adhere to things, adhere to priorities. Now, one of the frameworks that I
[Guest]: quote in the book, which is sort of, you know, fragmented authoritarianism, where
[Guest]: the idea that information, systemically, you don't want to report bad news to your bosses.
[Guest]: Because I am, if I am a carder, and my boss is still, if I'm a local official, and my boss
[Guest]: at the sort of higher level, whether the provincial level or the central level is telling me
[Guest]: GDP growth is a priority. Employment stability is a priority. And you need to maintain.
[Guest]: I will do whatever I can to maintain that. Even if it means creating pointless infrastructure,
[Guest]: because it reflects good on GDP. And that's what people end up doing. And if there is negative
[Guest]: information, I will try and keep it as low as possible. Because look, I know in a few years,
[Guest]: I'm moving away from here. So I'll leave that for the next guy to deal with. So there are systemic
[Guest]: sort of hurdles in terms of how information flows from bottom to the top. There are also
[Guest]: hurdles of information flowing across different domains, because a provincial governor and a
[Guest]: provincial party secretary are sort of equals, but the party secretary is a much more important
[Guest]: position. And across different government departments, there will be silos of information
[Guest]: flows and all that. And this happens in China, just like it happens in most other places,
[Guest]: by interdepartmental coordination can be difficult. Now, from the central leadership point
[Guest]: of view, it says, I need to whip all this in shape. And part of Xi Jinping's sort of campaign
[Guest]: has been to try and reshape incentives, push out people that he finds problematic politically,
[Guest]: and also from his economic agenda point of view, to try and get people in the right places.
[Guest]: Also try and address some of these systemic issues of information flows. The fact that
[Guest]: he's been unsuccessful to address at least the information flow issue is evident with what
[Guest]: happened in Wuhan. Because the information did not come clearly in time, or at least whatever
[Guest]: documentation that we have, it did not come fairly in time. Now, even here, I think the Communist
[Guest]: Party's narrative, like you pointed out, Xi Jinping vanished for a brief period. Yet, if you
[Guest]: see later on in February, they put out this statement saying, oh, he held this extraordinary
[Guest]: meeting on January 7. And he had taken control of things from that day onward. Well, if he did take
[Guest]: control of things, then why are you cribbing about information flow? Clearly, you knew, and you waited
[Guest]: for 13-14 days to act. There's another bit of reportage that I cite in the book where on 14th
[Guest]: of January, there is a meeting between, I think, central health officials and local officials,
[Guest]: and they talk about what's going on. So clearly, the central authorities knew before January 20th,
[Guest]: 21st, 22nd, which is when they sort of go and eventually impose a lockdown on Wuhan.
[Guest]: And on, I think, 17th or 18th January, there's a central team that lands in Wuhan,
[Guest]: and it spends a day assessing what's happening. And the next day, it recommends a lockdown,
[Guest]: essentially. It says this is a serious problem. So the narrative was a little bit sketchy from
[Guest]: the Chinese side. Did Xi Jinping know on January 7th? If he knew on January 7th, then the failure
[Guest]: from the 7th to the 23rd is also on him. And it is during that time that you see these officials
[Guest]: in Wuhan holding these grand New Year banquets. So the failure is also on him. But if he did not
[Guest]: know, why would you put out this statement in February saying that he knew? So that, to me,
[Guest]: seemed like a bit of a post-fact correction of, look, because you felt comfortable in probably
[Guest]: what you were doing at a certain point of time, you sort of reoriented things and saying, look,
[Guest]: we knew and we were in central government control. So I think that the narrative itself is,
[Guest]: they're on weak sort of ground when they make that claim. But yeah, I mean, initially, Xi Jinping is,
[Guest]: you know, after imposing the lockdown in the first meeting that he has on January 25th,
[Guest]: if I remember correctly, with the Politburo, he sort of for a few days, for a week or 10 days,
[Guest]: sort of vanishes from the People's Daily front pages, which never really happens. I mean,
[Guest]: there are occasions, yes, you don't see him for a while, for whatever reason. But at least you'll
[Guest]: see reports or something about him. But you suddenly see him going away, particularly at
[Guest]: this moment, when there is a crisis. And then he reemerges, you know, with a diplomatic meeting,
[Guest]: and then with another. And then you subsequently have this February 13th or 14th is when you have
[Guest]: this report about him having chaired a meeting on January 7th and all of that. You do feel that
[Guest]: there's a bit of rewriting of history that's already started at that early stage also.
[Guest]: And that continues, of course, throughout the process. I mean, with that said,
[Guest]: I mean, to give the devil his due, what the Communist Party did in terms of mobilizing
[Guest]: resources to be able to contain what was happening in Wuhan, in hindsight, today,
[Guest]: when we look at it, and even at that point of time, I mean, at that point, obviously,
[Guest]: we didn't know how this was going to pan out. But when I look at it in hindsight, and the model
[Guest]: that they devised to be able to not just deal with the problems in Wuhan, but subsequently outbreaks
[Guest]: in the Northeast, in Beijing, or even this week, that we are talking in Guangdong, they have
[Guest]: managed to create a structure where they know what to do. They have managed to give very clear
[Guest]: incentives to local officials. So a lot of local officials, not just in Wuhan,
[Guest]: have been subsequently sacked and faced sort of harsh penalties for failing to contain outbreaks.
[Guest]: You know, whether these are people who are in charge of prisons where there have been outbreaks,
[Guest]: whether these are sort of in different cities, there have been costs for local officials,
[Guest]: which, you know, when I look at India, and again, I've not studied what's happened in India in that
[Guest]: much detail at all, I've just lived it, I've not studied it. But I think that we've not seen those
[Guest]: costs. And there are different, the system is very different, it's difficult to impose the
[Guest]: nature of costs the Communist Party can, but that sort of shapes local incentives also to be able to
[Guest]: do that. And at the same time, I think there have been quite a few times that publicly the Communist
[Guest]: Party has said, don't falsify data. Now, you only say that, because you know, they're going to
[Guest]: falsify. So that is a systemic issue, which continues. So I think, from a narrative point
[Guest]: of view, I think there is a tremendous rewriting of history that's taken place. And I've tried to
[Guest]: document that some of these statements that came out. But at the same time, what you see is that
[Guest]: there is a tremendous amount of success that was achieved, as much as one may want to sort of
[Guest]: discard that when we can't, you know, it came with lots of costs, it came with social costs,
[Guest]: it came with cost to privacy, it came with cost to all of that. And again, that's a broader issue,
[Guest]: which has affected different countries also, you know, whether it's social cost, privacy,
[Guest]: like human costs, and all of that. But they've managed to limit that cost. And I think that
[Guest]: is an important thing to take away. And that, to me, is there, is where they derive their source
[Guest]: of confidence today. Because this detail of, you know, a rewriting of history from February 14 to
[Guest]: January 7, this does matter, did matter at that point of time. But the fact that they have been
[Guest]: successful in containing it, I don't think this anymore matters to people in China. It's a glitch
[Guest]: in the thing, it's, they understand it, but it would be a case of look, but look at us and look
[Guest]: at where the rest of the world is. I think that sort of then matters much more. In fact, that is
[Amit Varma]: a sharp contrast between China and India, like, you know, that they didn't just do the narrative,
[Amit Varma]: they also got some of the governance right, like at one point, you write about Beijing, quote,
[Amit Varma]: by 24 June, official data showed that around 3.2 million people in the city had been tested.
[Amit Varma]: It's important to note that these steps were adopted while the city had a total caseload
[Amit Varma]: of just 256 infections between 11 June and 24 June. By early next month, the outbreak had been
[Amit Varma]: effectively contained with the city reporting no new cases of infection as of 7 July. So again,
[Amit Varma]: mind blowing success. And imagine if, you know, we had shown the same kind of dedication here and
[Amit Varma]: say vaccinating people after vaccines were available. Now, a few sort of asides. One
[Amit Varma]: aside, of course, is that what was he doing on January 7? Why don't we know this problem could
[Amit Varma]: have been solved only if there was CCTV footage? Where was the CCTV footage? I'm sorry for the bad
[Amit Varma]: pun, I had to get one out of the way. A couple of other pointers. One is you spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: at the local level, because GDP is a metric, they are incentivized to make pointless infrastructure.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'd done an episode on GDP with the economist Rajeshwari Sengupta, link it from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes. And our main peeve about the way GDP is measured is that government spending is included,
[Amit Varma]: which means that you can just dig a ditch, fill it up, dig a ditch, fill it up, iterate endlessly,
[Amit Varma]: and your GDP is growing, growing, growing, though nothing productive is being done.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, there's a huge opportunity cost to all this digging of ditches. So GDP is just
[Amit Varma]: a really easy metric to game as indeed any metric is once it becomes a target. The other sort of
[Amit Varma]: resonance I found with India is that in populist rhetoric, there is a lot of identification with
[Amit Varma]: the cause of corruption. And you know, even in India around that time, in fact, the India
[Amit Varma]: against corruption movement started. And the reason is logical because people feel it,
[Amit Varma]: their everyday interface with the government involves corruption. So it's very easy to sort
[Amit Varma]: of get them riled up on that basis. But the problem is that we often miss the core problem
[Amit Varma]: of corruption. Like when India against corruption happened, I wrote a column saying Anna Hazare
[Amit Varma]: missed the point entirely. Because the core reason that corruption exists is that the state has too
[Amit Varma]: much power and discretion, right? The more you reduce power from areas where it should not have
[Amit Varma]: power and discretion, the less corruption there will be. And instead, what these people were
[Amit Varma]: proposing is that you have another committee called a Lokpal which sits on top of this and
[Amit Varma]: you have another layer of government as if that will ever solve anything. You know, you never judge
[Amit Varma]: a policy by its intentions, you do it by its outcome. But I can see why, you know, that would
[Amit Varma]: have taken off in China. And it's pretty convenient for Xi Jinping, that he can at one level sit at
[Amit Varma]: the center and spread the narrative or whatever the whole narrative of him being a benevolent
[Amit Varma]: leader or the Garibi Hatao narrative. You know, there was a version of that as well,
[Amit Varma]: while all the blame goes to the local government, because they are the direct interface with the
[Amit Varma]: people. And I wonder if there's a version of that happening in India, where no matter what happens,
[Amit Varma]: there's a certain bunch of people who will not blame the Prime Minister or the central government
[Amit Varma]: for it, you know, they'll either be completely apathetic and behave as if it is fate, or they
[Amit Varma]: will find other excuses to wish it away. Now, in your second chapter, you also pointed out
[Amit Varma]: an interesting thing about how the modes of messaging of the Chinese Communist Party changed,
[Amit Varma]: where you write, quote, While the indigestible stuff of stodgy propaganda, scouring through
[Amit Varma]: which Pierre Rickmans once said was akin to swallowing sawdust by the bucketful, survives in
[Amit Varma]: parts, there has been a significant evolution in terms of style and substance. Amidst the mountains
[Amit Varma]: of cliches, flaccid speeches, hollow slogans and fanciful statistics exists today's slick graphics,
[Amit Varma]: vivid storytelling, and online interactivity that seeks to enhance party-state responsiveness
[Amit Varma]: to public demands, opinion and criticism, stop quote. And as you pointed out, propaganda has
[Amit Varma]: always been a big part of the Communist Party, right, you know, the propaganda department
[Amit Varma]: existed from the 1920s, and so on. But it was all this stodgy language the way you know, even in
[Amit Varma]: India, the government press releases are written. Now, it seems to me that where we went in India,
[Amit Varma]: as far as you know, official ways of controlling the narrative are concerned, is that the usual
[Amit Varma]: government propaganda continued with the stodgy obfuscatory language, which doesn't really help
[Amit Varma]: them, supported by an IT wing, which, you know, on social media, adopted extremely crude methods,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes effective methods, but extremely crude methods of, you know, spreading false stories to
[Amit Varma]: begin with, but also just abusing critics and blah, blah, blah, all of that. While it seems
[Amit Varma]: that the Chinese move beyond that to something far more sophisticated, which comes from controlling
[Amit Varma]: the media, which comes from, as you pointed out, you know, having some cutting edge storytelling,
[Amit Varma]: that's also happening. And also, what you describe as quote, authoritarian participatory
[Amit Varma]: persuasion 2.0, a term coined by Maria Repnikova and Fan Keqing, which is basically defined as
[Amit Varma]: quote, the targets of propaganda are made into active collaborators in the process of recreating
[Amit Varma]: pro party discourses online, stop quote. And I remember I once was chatting with Pratik Sinha
[Amit Varma]: of Alt News. And this was before I did my episode with him a couple of years before that, I think
[Amit Varma]: Nitin and I were chatting with him at this meet in Bangalore. And he mentioned a very interesting
[Amit Varma]: story, he said that he was, there was this bit of fake news, which was fake news about some
[Amit Varma]: particular person, I forget the details. So he, you know, did all the forensic work that he does
[Amit Varma]: that Alt News is so incredibly good at. And they figured out that, you know, where it's coming from
[Amit Varma]: and they publish the story with that guy's name and all that. And a little while later, he gets a
[Amit Varma]: WhatsApp message or message from wherever, from that guy, who says, Bhaiya, can I talk to you?
[Amit Varma]: So he says, okay, and he finds out this kid is some teenage kid. He has nothing to do with ITCEL,
[Amit Varma]: nothing to do with any of that. He started this sort of news outlet, where he would make up
[Amit Varma]: stories. And then it was natural selection, he would see that what gets hits, what doesn't get
[Amit Varma]: hits. And what he found is that all the rabid Hindutva stuff got hits. And, you know, other stuff
[Amit Varma]: won't get hits. And therefore, that's where the market is. And the point there being that the
[Amit Varma]: ITCEL needs to do this kind of fake news, only to a certain extent. But once you kickstart something,
[Amit Varma]: it takes some momentum of its own, like indeed, in the Sushant Singh Rajput conspiracy theories,
[Amit Varma]: which are floating all over the place, which are insane. I mean, the earlier ones were that
[Amit Varma]: he invented 4G. So Akshay Kumar got him bumped off over the game. And then there was one that
[Amit Varma]: he created the COVID vaccine. And so they got him bumped off because the government wanted COVID to
[Amit Varma]: continue. And the version of that is that he created it for Bharat Biotech. But the most
[Amit Varma]: bizarre recent version, which I'll link that thread from the show notes, if it is still there,
[Amit Varma]: is that he's still alive. Apparently, there is some quantum physics thing by which a person can
[Amit Varma]: be split into two. So he split himself into two. So he could go into hiding to create the COVID
[Amit Varma]: vaccine, and his duplicate got killed. And therefore, I think Yogi Adityanath is now
[Amit Varma]: looking for him for some reason, some really incredibly bizarre thing. But I don't even know
[Amit Varma]: why we went into this digression, authoritarian participatory persuasion 2.0. Now, the question
[Amit Varma]: that kind of comes up, and these are really two questions, because I've rambled a bit.
[Amit Varma]: One question is, tell me about this use of new media and how they will come to censorship later
[Amit Varma]: censorship is how do you stop unwanted messages going out? But this is how do you propagate good
[Amit Varma]: messages and get them going out? And how do you use the media for that? And the Chinese seem
[Amit Varma]: fairly advanced in that. So tell me a bit about that. And the other supplementary very quick
[Amit Varma]: question is that do you think that this sort of narrative that Xi Jinping has come up with,
[Amit Varma]: which is essentially a populist narrative, right, nationalism, hatred of the outsider,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah, it's a standard populist trope. Do you think that this populist trope is popular,
[Amit Varma]: because it touches certain triggers in common people, and therefore, these are the narratives
[Amit Varma]: that work? So in a sense that this behavior is not coming from the supply end of the market,
[Guest]: but the demand end of the market? No, I don't. I mean, I think that it's a bit of both, right?
[Guest]: That there is a demand that's being created. You know, there is a demand that's being nurtured.
[Guest]: So that is one thing. And if you look at what Xi Jinping has done, and he's quite,
[Guest]: somebody who's quite big on narrative setting and the role of the media, and not just the media,
[Guest]: I mean, he also talks about artists, you know, painters, sculptors, whoever else,
[Guest]: even people, architects, the idea that you need to be doing things that they
[Guest]: would sort of support the socialist idea and the socialist vision, and would support the party.
[Guest]: And he wants sort of patriotic art and everything in that sense. With regard to the media, I think
[Guest]: very early on, as soon as he took charge, he sort of spoke about reshaping the media in terms of
[Guest]: telling China's stories well. You know, there's a certain story that we want to tell the outside
[Guest]: world and to our own people, and we need to tell them well. One of the aspects of that is tell
[Guest]: stories which have sort of a universal human appeal, or, you know, make what is our propaganda
[Guest]: into much more, you know, widely, which has a greater appeal because it attaches to certain
[Guest]: human values, rather than just saying that, you know, the party said this, the party did that.
[Guest]: Now that stodgy propaganda still exists. And at one point in time, you spoke about
[Guest]: Indian government press releases. Honestly, there is no comparison between Indian government press
[Guest]: releases and Chinese government propaganda. Indian government, I mean, by the measure of,
[Guest]: you know, Chinese government propaganda, Indian government press releases are
[Guest]: very clear, very direct, honestly. If you read any government plan or reportage around a Chinese
[Guest]: government plan, the first 30%, you'd be reading essentially repeated statements about, you know,
[Guest]: the party, the ideology, Xi Jinping says this, you know, and, and that can, you know, be mind numbing.
[Guest]: Now, what they have done along with this is that over the years, they've invested in sort of new
[Guest]: media capabilities, they've invested in far more, they've sort of invested in capabilities to tell
[Guest]: stories better in terms of the visual appeal in terms of the narrative. And at the end of
[Guest]: particularly this, this episode in Wuhan, in late February, in fact, Wuhan was not even unlocked,
[Guest]: they came up with a book, which is also published in English. And that was, you know, sold on
[Guest]: Amazon. So I bought a copy on Amazon, I read through the book in English. And I quote some
[Guest]: stories from the book. And one of the stories that I quote is about this one truck driver who's
[Guest]: supposed to go. And if you read through the story, what you get a sense, I mean, to me, when I was
[Guest]: reading the story, while I was reading that book, the character in my head was Salman Khan, you
[Guest]: know, he's driving around, you know, on the truck. And I, to me, that was the case of, you know,
[Guest]: that's how you're telling the story of, you know, somebody delivering a component to build a
[Guest]: hospital in Wuhan, for COVID care, you know, and things like that. And throughout that, see,
[Guest]: that entire book, you have these stories about, you know, people caring for a stranger, somebody's
[Guest]: dedication to their job, somebody's sort of, you know, in this case, going into danger, but in
[Guest]: another case, sort of just carrying out their routine job of making sure that things are
[Guest]: cleaned, some lady somewhere in some other city crying, because she can't get in touch with her
[Guest]: parents. And she manages to somehow get in touch with a restaurant and tells the restaurant to
[Guest]: deliver food, and they deliver food. And the guy also tells her, don't worry, my sister,
[Guest]: your parents are fine, and whatever, and I will take care. Now, those sorts of things have
[Guest]: universal appeal. And they're doing two things. They're doing exactly what Repnikova is writing
[Guest]: about, you know, and I'm a huge fan of her work. What she's writing about is essentially,
[Guest]: that you've created a space where people who are reading this, people are telling these stories,
[Guest]: people who are part of all of this, will look at it and say, yes, this was a shared tragedy,
[Guest]: and we all were in it together and all our strength it took to come out of it. So it takes
[Guest]: focus away from the government. At the same time, it's also telling the story of in these individual
[Guest]: stories of heroism or whatever. There's also the hand of the government and the party all around.
[Guest]: Because a lot of the times in these sort of stories, what you'll find is that, that fellow
[Guest]: who was doing this heroic deed was a party carder. It's very subtle there. Or it was that fireman who
[Guest]: did this or you know, and I mean, when we look at India or anywhere else in the world, this narrative
[Guest]: got, you know, in India, you saw this somewhere, right? Criticism got conflated with how can you
[Guest]: criticize our Corona warriors, that sort of logic. And that conflation is also happening over there.
[Guest]: At the same time, the way the story is told, the idea is to appeal to your heartstrings so that
[Guest]: you feel and if you feel empathy, you can sort of really say, you know, you don't sort of go
[Guest]: and criticize as much. So that's one thing. Domestically, the idea is you build that sort
[Guest]: of sense of community and empathy, that we were all in this together, it was unprecedented,
[Guest]: whatever. In terms of visually, if any, if anybody, if any of the listeners would want to go,
[Guest]: you can go to YouTube, and you can see some of the documentaries that CCTV, CGTN,
[Guest]: and CCTV put together with regard to Wuhan. They are absolutely cutting edge.
[Guest]: From those wonderful drone shots of a silent city, to sort of the close ups of doctors, to sort of
[Guest]: how the camera moves and cuts. It's not a bland telling a story, it will move you, whatever you
[Guest]: may end up believing or not believing, however critical you may be about the Chinese. The
[Guest]: humanizing of the system, the people and all of that, it softens the edge of political division
[Guest]: at home and abroad. And I think that's part of what the narrative is like, what the approach is,
[Guest]: you know, you want to tell China's stories well in that way. The other part of it is to also say
[Guest]: how the system delivered, you know, through the people, you're also talking about how the system
[Guest]: operated and how it functioned well and how it delivered, which again, is useful for legitimacy
[Guest]: abroad and legitimacy at home. And I think that's sort of where this entire, and if you saw this
[Guest]: about 10-12 years ago, it was not this well, you know, I mean, again, it's looking at how
[Guest]: changed graphics and changed storytelling style can make a story much more effective and appealing
[Guest]: to somebody. You look at just how movies have evolved over the last 15 years to today.
[Guest]: And there's a huge difference in how Chinese, just, if you look at India, you'll see the
[Guest]: difference. If you look at China, you'll see the difference. What's important is that Chinese state
[Guest]: media led by the party has invested in that. It's invested in not just creating these narratives,
[Guest]: but also creating, you know, new media tools. One example that I give in the book later on,
[Guest]: one of the chapters is about this graphic with regard to racism in America that the people
[Guest]: daily put out. It's stuff like that. They created a, you know, again, this is not journalism,
[Guest]: but you created a video with sort of gamified version of Mike Pompeo having to cross different
[Guest]: levels. And Mike Pompeo talks about the Chinese Communist Party failing. And it's like wrong
[Guest]: answer. He talks about the virus leaking from a lab or being a bio warfare weapon, whatever,
[Guest]: and wrong answer and three wrongs and you're out. It's like a video game that you've created
[Guest]: as a video, because you know that that is the kind of stuff that will get more traction on
[Guest]: social media. Then some stodgy old guy sitting in a black suit with gray hair saying, we don't agree
[Guest]: with this. These hegemonic Americans are wrong and whatever. So you're looking at what works
[Guest]: and you're trying to use that. And that's part of this, you know, so firstly, you're using the
[Guest]: community and their stories to be able to further your narrative. At the same time, you're developing
[Guest]: these new cutting edge tools relying on technology using moviemaking tools and everything to try and
[Guest]: tell your stories in a form of in a fashion that will appeal emotionally to people which sort of
[Guest]: takes off the edge of a lot of the criticism. And I think that's really smart strategy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the graphic you mentioned about Black Lives Matter is also struck out. I'll read that
[Amit Varma]: sentence out because I found the image quite amusing. Quote, the party's flagship paper also
[Amit Varma]: put out a controversial graphic titled Disguise of Human Rights, depicting a police officer breaking
[Amit Varma]: through the robes of the Statue of Liberty, towering over a bloodstained White House,
[Amit Varma]: crushing what appears to be the neck of an African American man, stop quote, basically packing
[Amit Varma]: everything together. This seems to be as crude a graphic as say, you know, all those photoshopped
[Amit Varma]: images of Nehru partying with various women and all of that. But but yeah, I get your point about
[Amit Varma]: the increasing sophistication of a lot of this propaganda from these modern day Lenny Reifenstahl
[Amit Varma]: as it were. And by the way, the truck driver whose role you want Salman Khan to play his name
[Amit Varma]: is Sun Yang. So it's almost similar like Salman and Sun Yang. Now, you know, this is one aspect,
[Amit Varma]: you have a message, you want to get it out. Another aspect is there is a message out there,
[Amit Varma]: you want to stop it. Now, as you've described that social media was actually very vibrant
[Amit Varma]: in exposing what was happening in Wuhan, exposing where government response was wrong,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And initially, it was just allowed to be vibrant, and all this was allowed
[Amit Varma]: to play out. And then the party kind of cracked down hard, and there was a hard censorship. And
[Amit Varma]: some of it reminded me of, you know, what's happening in Uttar Pradesh, where also you're
[Amit Varma]: not allowed to complain about oxygen cylinders not being there. Or, you know, if you tweet a video of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a police officer taking away your cylinder to give it to a well connected guy,
[Amit Varma]: when you know, and there was a case like that where someone's relative was ill, he went way
[Amit Varma]: out of his way, we spent a big chunk of his savings, got oxygen for the relative, and then
[Amit Varma]: a cop comes and takes it over because, you know, for somebody else. And the person who tweeted that
[Amit Varma]: I think had a case filed on him or something insane shit like that happening in UP and China.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this sort of censorship, like your chapter on that is very
[Amit Varma]: evocatively titled, imposing amnesia, which is a lovely title. So tell me a little bit about how
[Amit Varma]: they went about doing this. And as you crack down on people's freedom of expression, you have to
[Amit Varma]: control the narrative about that as well. So how was all of this playing out?
[Guest]: Right. So I think this is something that the Communist Party has a tremendous amount of
[Guest]: experience in doing, you know, if you go back to sort of Bill Clinton, saying that, you know,
[Guest]: let's see the nail jello to the wall, when the internet was sort of evolving and social media
[Guest]: was evolving, they clearly figured out an algorithm to nail jello to the wall. And this
[Guest]: was an example of that. Now, towards the beginning of what was happening again, I mean, we don't know
[Guest]: exactly why there was freedom of expression for the first week or 10 days or so. And, you know,
[Guest]: but we do know that there were directives that came out at a certain point of time, which a
[Guest]: document has to and then the crackdown sort of begins. But initially, there is freedom. Now,
[Guest]: there are different ways of looking at this. One is that, look, it was Chinese New Year,
[Guest]: the censors were on a break, they were chilling, who knows. The other way to look at this is also
[Guest]: the fact that it's useful to have people went because particularly if you're having if you
[Guest]: have this dynamic, where the central leadership does not know what's going on in a region,
[Guest]: particularly as you've imposed this lockdown or whatever, this is a great feedback mechanism also.
[Guest]: And Maria Repnikova again talks about this in her work, where she talks about using this as
[Guest]: feedback to be able to do certain things that you might want to do, particularly when you're trying
[Guest]: to push and pull with the center and local leadership continues. There's a wonderful old
[Guest]: saying in China that the emperor is far away and the mountains are high and so forth. So, you know,
[Guest]: it's, you know, local stuff, local guys can get away with a lot of things. And therefore this,
[Guest]: I think the Chinese Communist Party central leadership over the decades has used social
[Guest]: media as a feedback mechanism with regard to its policy priorities with regard to keeping a check
[Guest]: on local leadership. And I think my hunch is that this is what was going on in those early days,
[Guest]: where they were trying to do this, while also providing a wall for people to vent,
[Guest]: because people needed to vent, you couldn't just let that be. But as you sort of came to grips
[Guest]: with things, or as you felt that the challenge is going to be much more problematic, you sort
[Guest]: of start to crack down, either which way, and I don't know which way it went, whether they felt
[Guest]: more comfortable or whether they felt more uncomfortable. And that is why they cracked
[Guest]: down. But at a certain point in early February, they start to sort of shut down. And that happens.
[Guest]: Now, in that duration, what we see is that, and this is again, a credit to a lot of the Chinese
[Guest]: journalists, when we're talking about my time in China, I was talking about how the pressures that
[Guest]: some of those people working over there are really, really incredible. And I have a lot of regard for
[Guest]: that. And when you what you see in those few weeks, when things are open, you see the kind
[Guest]: of reports which today, particularly after the second wave in India, I think a lot of us can
[Guest]: empathize much more with, you know, the fact that there is there is no hospital facility,
[Guest]: the fact that there is a lockdown, how do you go to the hospital, the fact that and a lot of those
[Guest]: reports, which are saved by some of these, some of the sort of journalists and researchers,
[Guest]: which who documented them and then save them as the censors, eventually started wiping the system
[Guest]: clean. Again, it's a really risky job that they've done to do that, to be able to save all of this.
[Guest]: And it's a service to people like the world that they've actually saved some of these documentation.
[Guest]: But if you read through those stories, you will see the kind of chaos in the system that existed,
[Guest]: which I mean, when second wave started in India, to me, that is what it looked like, not so much
[Guest]: the first wave in India, because capacity was a problem, but it wasn't that bad or that dire,
[Guest]: at least in our cities. Today, what we saw in the second wave, to me is very reminiscent of when I
[Guest]: read those stories from Wuhan, that's exactly what was playing out over there. And I think that's the
[Guest]: first thing that the censors eventually started cleaning that stuff up. To me, it's highly likely
[Guest]: that the government felt that it has started to understand what needs to be done. What we saw was
[Guest]: that they were shifting the narrative towards a positive domain where they were showing us the
[Guest]: two hospitals being built, there was live streaming of the entire process of the hospital being built.
[Guest]: And that was a sort of showcase of Chinese engineering prowess. While at the same time,
[Guest]: you were starting to sort of clean up some of the dissent, anger, frustration that existed,
[Guest]: and the reports of misgovernance, systemic failures, and all of that, after a certain
[Guest]: period of time, because you felt probably that you were now in control. And as that remained,
[Guest]: it would challenge the party's narrative going forward, that had managed to control
[Guest]: things effectively. So I think that sort of went hand in hand. Therefore, anybody who sort of ended
[Guest]: up going and challenging the narrative that the party then wanted to build, whether it was citizen
[Guest]: journalists, whether it was lawyers, whether it was whoever, they were all picked up. They were
[Guest]: all then charged with this infuriating crime of spreading rumors. And again, such an amorphous
[Guest]: sort of nebulous concept that anything you can be charged under that sort of logic.
[Guest]: And they were all picked up under that, while the people who were originally charged, like you
[Guest]: identified, those eight doctors, they were then exonerated. At a certain point of time, I think
[Guest]: there was genuine worry, particularly when Dr. Li Wenliang, who became the icon for the criticism
[Guest]: and for the punishment that he dealt with, then eventually passed away in early February.
[Guest]: For that brief moment, you could see that the system was really struggling to deal with the
[Guest]: narrative online, because there were so many tributes, people were bypassing censorship.
[Guest]: And again, there's a cat and mouse game that goes on in China, which a lot of the people online are
[Guest]: quite familiar with. And some of the examples that I document about how they've saved some stories,
[Guest]: how they've said stories using emoticons, using different language and things like that,
[Guest]: or saving sort of narratives to PDF so that they last for posterity.
[Guest]: And I think from the Chinese government's point of view, the case was that after they gained a
[Guest]: certain degree of control, and this was my best case assumption as to what they did,
[Guest]: their approach was, can we make sure that a certain degree of space for venting may remain,
[Guest]: but it has to be within prescribed limits. But at no point, the narrative of the government's
[Guest]: control, efficiency, and ability to respond to this sustained. So you may criticize local
[Guest]: officials, you may criticize all of that, but you don't necessarily criticize the central
[Guest]: leadership. Now, the one sort of thing, and I sort of see a parallel between what you were
[Guest]: talking about India, that little boy that you were talking about, you can't really ride the
[Guest]: tiger and eventually just expect to get off without it being challenging. So what we've seen is that
[Guest]: the narrative of nationalism eventually starts to gather its own sort of pace and steam.
[Guest]: So in the book, I talk about Fang Fang and her writings. And I even mentioned that at a certain
[Guest]: point of time, she is not challenging the central government. She at a certain point of time
[Guest]: actually says that, oh, now that these guys have gotten in charge, things might be better off.
[Guest]: In that she actually supports the narrative that the local government sort of failed,
[Guest]: and the central government is better off and whatever, or at least that belief that they
[Guest]: will take care of things better. Yet there is tremendous nationalistic pushback against her.
[Guest]: And Chinese media struggles with that. Global Times, which is this nationalist
[Guest]: tabloid struggles with that at some level, and eventually gives in to the nationalistic
[Guest]: sentiment. And today, if I just take a go away from the book just today, in the last month,
[Guest]: what we have, month, month and a half, what we have seen is that the nationalistic narrative
[Guest]: on social media in China has become so strong that even its most nationalistic papers are sort
[Guest]: of struggling to contain it. And an example is of, about a month ago, there was a controversy about a
[Guest]: communist party-linked affiliated social media account, Weibo account, publishing a very crude
[Guest]: graphic showing funeral pyres in India, and showing the building of the Hoshen Shan Hospital
[Guest]: in China. No, sorry, not the hospital. That was about showing the Chinese rocket launch and talking
[Guest]: about how progress and whatever in India and China. And another one was about fire in India,
[Guest]: fire in China, Hoshen Shan, sort of fire mountain hospital. So the idea is that that was a post put
[Guest]: out by a party unit, party unit Weibo account. It was eventually taken down. Yet a lot of people
[Guest]: supported that. A lot of people obviously criticized it also and called it crude,
[Guest]: crass, whatever in Chinese. But there was a nationalistic strand which supported that idea,
[Guest]: some even fairly prominent people. And there's an argument that goes on between Fudan University
[Guest]: Professor Shen Yi and Global Times' editor Hu Shijin, where Hu Shijin is saying, we shouldn't
[Guest]: be doing this. Through official accounts, we shouldn't be doing this. And Global Times
[Guest]: reporters on Twitter were critical of such posts. And they were getting eaten up by the nationalist
[Guest]: sort of brigade in China. So, you know, these things can gather momentum of their own and,
[Guest]: you know, for anybody, whether it's in India, whether it's in China, you need to be careful.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, even in India, you have these, you know, civil wars
[Amit Varma]: within Hindutva. You know, if you just Google trads versus raitas, for example, you'll come
[Amit Varma]: across them. And there are people who are saying that Modi has led the Hindus down, he's not
[Amit Varma]: sufficiently nationalistic for them. And this is always what happens. I think what social media
[Amit Varma]: also exacerbates is, it drives people to the extremes, because everybody is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: posturing their own purity, attacking other people for not being pure enough. And ultimately,
[Amit Varma]: the fringes win until the whole thing cannot hold. And this happens, by the way, both on the
[Amit Varma]: left and the right. It's not just the right. Now, a couple of interesting things I'll refer back to.
[Amit Varma]: One, speaking of Stephen Young, the doctor who died, you have this, this very interesting
[Amit Varma]: narrative where he dies, the news that he's died is reported, then it's immediately taken offline,
[Amit Varma]: as if the government is trying to figure out that, you know, how do we deal with this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in terms of story arc and all of that. And there's this great line you have in your book,
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote, Al Jazeera cited an unidentified source from Wuhan Central Hospital saying that
[Amit Varma]: Lee's condition was critical. And he stopped the heartbeat earlier tonight already. But he was put
[Amit Varma]: on intubation and extra corporeal membrane oxygenation, just out of pressure from the
[Amit Varma]: leaders. Stop quote. So basically, the guy is dead. But then the leaders say no, no, keep him
[Amit Varma]: alive. And they put him on ventilator and all that basically put the body on ventilator and all that,
[Amit Varma]: which is crazy. What you've also pointed out is that all these pieces, which were taken down,
[Amit Varma]: were censored, and so on. People have made different positories of them. There's an
[Amit Varma]: ENCOV memory repository. There's Terminus 2049, which is a GitHub repository. I think you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out how the creator of that got into a little bit of trouble. And I really enjoyed what you
[Amit Varma]: reproduced of Fang Fang's diary entries, and which are now available as a book, which I've just picked
[Amit Varma]: up, but haven't yet read. It's a book in English. I mean, which is why I picked it up, the English
[Amit Varma]: version is out. Now, Fang Fang was a writer who between Jan 25 and March 24, wrote a quarantine
[Amit Varma]: diary. And some of it is beautiful writing like this excerpt that you reproduced, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the city isn't the purgatory that a lot of people seem to be imagining it to be. It is instead,
[Amit Varma]: a rather quiet and beautiful, almost majestic city. But all that changes the second someone
[Amit Varma]: in your family falls ill. Immediately everything is thrown into chaos. Stop quote. And later on,
[Amit Varma]: you know, again, I'm finding an India connection here in terms of who she reminds me of,
[Amit Varma]: you quote Hemant Adlaka writing about her quote, in a series of articles, commentaries and blogs,
[Amit Varma]: on average five to six write ups a day, mainly carried by a few Maoist leaning websites and
[Amit Varma]: blogs. Wuhan diary, which is a diary has not only been dismissed as trash and nothing but a pack of
[Amit Varma]: lies. Fang Fang herself too has been targeted as dishonest, writer of petty bourgeois character,
[Amit Varma]: and only cares for cheap publicity, stop quote. And I instantly thought of the kind of criticism
[Amit Varma]: that Barkha Dutt did during her superb journalism, where people accused her of preying on the dead,
[Amit Varma]: because she was showing images of the funeral pyres and all that, except that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they called her anti national, but I guess the Chinese version of that is petty bourgeois.
[Amit Varma]: So again, has such resonance. Now tell me also about like, this is an internal narrative,
[Amit Varma]: this is what they're doing inside. You've also written about what they try to do to control
[Amit Varma]: the narrative outside, including set up these 1000s of fake Twitter accounts, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: spend a lot of money on Facebook promotions. And I think Twitter banned a whole bunch of
[Amit Varma]: accounts set up by the Chinese for the propaganda and all of that, which shows that at least there,
[Amit Varma]: they hadn't at that time reached a certain level of sophistication where that would,
[Amit Varma]: you know, not happen. So tell me a little bit about their attempts at controlling the narrative
[Guest]: outside. Yeah, I think that attempts at sort of shaping the narrative outside is essentially been
[Guest]: about how the world perceives what the party did in Wuhan, and subsequently. So by the end of
[Guest]: February, the Communist Party is fairly comfortable with what's happening in Wuhan, and they seem to
[Guest]: have a grip on it. They've also incentivized tremendous production capacity with regard to
[Guest]: masks and the rest of it. And by sort of, you know, end of February, I think Wang Yi, the foreign
[Guest]: minister has a conversation with his Iranian counterpart and his Italian counterpart. And he's
[Guest]: already talking about, look, don't worry, we support you, because we've got this capacity.
[Guest]: And by March, you see them starting to export a tremendous amount, you know, beginning to sort of
[Guest]: export these things. So how the narrative sort of starts to shift is that they start to initially
[Guest]: when sort of outbreak happens, there's a focus on, of course, how sudden this is how nobody knew
[Guest]: how this is unprecedented and the rest of it, and how they've done a good job at actually
[Guest]: controlling it. Along with that, there's a sort of emphasis on how they've been transparent about
[Guest]: it from day one, which I think is a fight that they are fighting even today with the Americans
[Guest]: and others about the level of transparency. The third narrative was with regard to look,
[Guest]: you should be thankful to us that we've sacrificed the city and a province and much more to be able
[Guest]: to contain this threat within our borders. So instead of criticizing us for delayed action,
[Guest]: you should be thankful to us that you know, we've sacrificed ourselves to save the rest of you lot.
[Guest]: And of course, subsequently, it comes down to look, it's our manufacturing capacity,
[Guest]: it's our organizational capacity, it's all of that, that's now helping you lot.
[Guest]: So don't politicize this virus. It's an enemy of mankind, whatever. Now to push all of this. Now,
[Guest]: this is a good bit of the narrative that I've spoken about. There's an ugly bit about the
[Guest]: narrative also. To push all of this along with the ugly bit they sort of created, there was
[Guest]: obviously an organic movement of how the media acted. And then you've got bots and, you know,
[Guest]: creations, which are, you know, accounts, which are sort of amplifying this narrative on social
[Guest]: media. And the objective is to basically, like I said, try and create an environment in the West,
[Guest]: which is not the rest of the world, which looks at China with, which looks at China with empathy
[Guest]: and in some degrees respect, you know, or the party with empathy and respect. And subsequently,
[Guest]: I think even they even talk about awe, because, look, we managed to contain it, whereas the mighty
[Guest]: Americans and the rest of these other countries have sort of struggled and whatever. And I think
[Guest]: that's part of the entire process. They've used obviously media, social media, official sort of
[Guest]: statements, engagements with world leaders, as they started delivering products to other parts
[Guest]: of the world. There was a lot of fanfare with which these products were delivered. And some
[Guest]: of this is obviously leaders in different parts of the world seeing their incentives, for example,
[Guest]: in Serbia. But in other cases, it also rubbed people the wrong way, because they tried to push
[Guest]: their narrative to the detriment of, say, the European Union's cohesion, which I document in
[Guest]: the book also. But to me, a lot of this was done essentially to shape a positive external narrative,
[Guest]: but also to shape a domestic narrative about, look, this is how good we were, this is how strong the
[Guest]: party was. It not just contained things. Firstly, what it did was unprecedented, we had to do it.
[Guest]: Secondly, it's effective, we've managed to contain it. Thirdly, look at the rest of the world,
[Guest]: they are now dependent on us, we are doing these things for them. So don't sort of criticize us.
[Guest]: So it sort of works both ways. Externally, this sort of push of narrative also hurt them eventually
[Guest]: in the long run, which is what I document in the book. The sort of ugly part of the narrative was
[Guest]: when this controversy around the origins of the virus sort of become more prominent,
[Guest]: where the Chinese engage in tremendous amount of disinformation themselves. The American
[Guest]: administration doesn't sort of hold up well, of course. I mean, Pompeo and Trump don't hold up
[Guest]: well. And I document this, they sort of flip flop quite a bit with regard to saying that we have
[Guest]: evidence, okay, we don't have evidence. At a certain point, even the Office of Director of
[Guest]: National Intelligence of the US expressly says that this virus is not manmade. So I think some
[Guest]: of that gets lost in all the controversy that we've seen even today, but last year, in terms of
[Guest]: what the Chinese wanted to achieve with this narrative, and they get even more aggressive
[Guest]: as this happens. Part of it, again, is for domestic interest to quell doubts domestically.
[Guest]: And so the sort of suspicion that this could be sort of American biological warfare and those
[Guest]: sorts of things, so that you sort of divert attention. At the same time, it's also
[Guest]: internationally to try and push back. And the Chinese tend to get, the Chinese diplomats get
[Guest]: very aggressive with this, which becomes, you know, the phrase wolf warrior diplomacy sort of
[Guest]: comes into play in all of this. The one more component of this, and this was seen in early
[Guest]: days, particularly, and I guess even today, there's a strand of this that exists. But early
[Guest]: days, it was much more prominent, was that any criticism of the Communist Party, or of China's
[Guest]: handling of this outbreak, they conflated that along with legitimate concerns of racism in other
[Guest]: parts of the world. So obviously, lots of Asian Americans, people of Chinese descent, there was
[Guest]: lots of racism, which I again document in the book, which is a failing of those countries where
[Guest]: this is happening. But what the Communist Party does is that it picks up those strands, and it
[Guest]: sort of conflates that with China's sort of the Communist Party's actions with regard to the
[Guest]: pandemic. And under the guise of that criticism, it starts to talk about any criticism of the
[Guest]: Communist Party is seen as you know, the criticism of as soon as racist attack, and that conflation
[Guest]: is problematic. But they do that deliberately, with the idea that, you know, to sort of stem
[Guest]: critical voices. And that, to me, was again, something that, particularly in the West,
[Guest]: it's important for people to realize when, you know, when racism in the West sort of
[Guest]: rears its ugly head, it empowers this discourse from the Communist Party of China.
[Guest]: At the same time, Chinese diplomats, and some of them, they sort of cross all levels of
[Guest]: diplomatic decency. I mean, the Chinese embassy in France is particularly virulent. And at one
[Guest]: point of time, it is even accusing people of, you know, deliberately letting people die in hospitals.
[Guest]: And then of course, you sort of climb back, you know, but you're basically saying to your people
[Guest]: by being this aggressive, that our system has worked, we are better off, we are much more
[Guest]: humane. And we are much more efficient. And look at the West, it's so messy. Look at this
[Guest]: space, which talk about democracy, they are inefficient, they are unable to contain things.
[Guest]: And that sort of should tell you to have much more confidence in the party. And that's at the
[Guest]: heart of the narrative of what they want to achieve. The problem is that in trying to achieve
[Guest]: that, and in overcompensating to try to achieve that, you start to alienate people around the
[Guest]: world. And that's where you sort of see this linkage between foreign policy and domestic
[Guest]: policy, where the boundaries are very porous, and narrative sort of spills over on both ends.
[Guest]: And I think that to me is probably one of the most fascinating things about what's happened
[Guest]: in the last year. Because a lot of us when we look at Chinese foreign policy, and this wolf
[Guest]: warrior diplomacy, the argument is, why is it that suddenly they are doing this? Because when
[Guest]: you still step back and look at it from a strategic perspective, you will see that it's
[Guest]: self-defeating. But what we don't take into account is how the system is structured to
[Guest]: incentivize some of this behavior, and also the sense of threat and the sense of opportunity
[Guest]: that fuels this behavior at an individual level. Because if I'm being more aggressive,
[Guest]: I'm satisfying my bosses also. But also at a level of narrative in society at home,
[Guest]: to try and breed confidence about your own system, and to breed this sense of conflict.
[Guest]: Because that sense of conflict and nationalism also sustains you at home and your legitimacy
[Guest]: at home. And I think that to me, that was sort of fascinating meta point of what happened in
[Amit Varma]: the last year. So I've taken a lot of your time, it's, you know, we've been chatting for four
[Amit Varma]: hours. And the thing is, we talk for four hours. And I, you know, in my case, the fan is off,
[Amit Varma]: the AC is off and all of that. But listeners are listening for two hours, because they're
[Amit Varma]: listening at double speed, which seems to me to be a little bit more unfair, I'm putting in
[Amit Varma]: substantially more work. But more than that, you are putting in substantially more work,
[Amit Varma]: because you're not talking at double speed, you're talking at normal speed. So I'll direct everyone
[Amit Varma]: to head on over to your book and read your book, because we've barely touched the surface I have,
[Amit Varma]: like you won't believe how much notes I have. I mean, it could be a small short book in itself.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, we just kind of touched on little bits of it, the entire book is enlightening and worth
[Amit Varma]: reading. But a couple of questions before we go. And the first one is, you know, in this narrative,
[Amit Varma]: it's just a really fascinating story. Because what one gets out of it is that China is trying to
[Amit Varma]: assert itself and make its place in the world. Obviously, it, you know, right from 2010, when
[Amit Varma]: it overtook Japan and became the second largest economy in the world is wanted to assert itself
[Amit Varma]: as a superpower, which can be up there with the US and present an alternative view of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: Now, some of the thinking that the Chinese have behind this is crude, and some is sophisticated,
[Amit Varma]: some of their methods are crude, and some are sophisticated. Some of the responses to them are
[Amit Varma]: crude, such as from Donald Trump last year, and some are a little more sophisticated. And what
[Amit Varma]: also happens is that, like you pointed out, every message, every diktat that sort of goes out from
[Amit Varma]: the top will get amplified in extreme and crude ways. So for example, if the premier says that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we need to take a nationalistic line on this, everybody will go overboard and take a
[Amit Varma]: hyper nationalistic line to please the boss. And that's where things kind of go out of whack.
[Amit Varma]: Now, your last chapter is called A New Contest. And it talks about the possibility of this new
[Amit Varma]: kind of Cold War beginning. And especially things have kind of become worse in the last couple of
[Amit Varma]: years with all this talk of de-globalization and international trade taking a hit and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: You pointed out at the start of this episode that what has happened over the last year,
[Amit Varma]: what has happened since the outbreak in Wuhan, is something that could affect the next 5-10 years,
[Amit Varma]: if not more, or what happens in geopolitics. So tell me why that is? Tell me what are your,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what's the best case scenario? What's the worst case scenario? What should we be wary
[Amit Varma]: of looking forward into the next 10 years? Because on the one hand, you know, I don't think it's a
[Amit Varma]: bad thing for the world if China gets richer. And I mean, ultimately, it's social interactions are
[Amit Varma]: a win-win game. It's a positive something. But at the same time, you see certain amounts of
[Amit Varma]: belligerence, some of it in the narrative, some of it in what is happening in our neighborhood.
[Amit Varma]: India has been having border problems recently. So what did you mean when you said that this will
[Guest]: affect the next 10 years or so? Right. So broad question, right? I mean,
[Guest]: firstly, whether it's sort of from China's point of view, to me, a lot of the conversation in the
[Guest]: last six, eight months, particularly, one year also has been about how China's geopolitical
[Guest]: space is becoming far more difficult, right? That, you know, oh, the West, we now have the Quad,
[Guest]: and we have, you know, Biden is trying to bring the US and Europe together, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And this is China's diplomatic failure, that some of this is happening. And I subscribe to that to
[Guest]: some degree that yes, and I sort of make that argument in the book also in the last chapter,
[Guest]: where the idea of galvanizing Western opinion about China's rise and the threat that China's
[Guest]: rise poses is partly a failure of China's own policy. It wouldn't have happened on its own,
[Guest]: I do think that it would have, but maybe not at this speed and with this ferocity.
[Guest]: But the speed and ferocity is also partly to do with China's own policy,
[Guest]: or the Communist Party's own policy. In terms of, let me first take the issue of de-globalization.
[Guest]: What's happened, and not just about the last year, but actually for the last few years,
[Guest]: in particular, that sort of underlying angst in the West with regard to the fruits of globalization
[Guest]: being unevenly distributed, and middle class in the West struggling, or at least relatively
[Guest]: struggling compared to say, folks in India, and that sort of their inability to deal with that,
[Guest]: and the challenge of sort of new technology taking jobs in that revolution sort of
[Guest]: requiring you to adapt your economies. All of that sort of came together with, you know,
[Guest]: under Trump, particularly even before Trump's election, where he sort of identifies China as
[Guest]: a fundamental problem for a lot of this. Now, the problem in Western economies is far deeper than
[Guest]: China. But China became the sort of the guy that you picked on. And in some cases, fairly,
[Guest]: you know, the idea that the Chinese state subsidies distort the market, the idea that,
[Guest]: you know, also things like data and technology, the state does not provide a level playing field,
[Guest]: all of that is fair game. And this is something that the West has been talking to the Chinese
[Guest]: about for over two decades now, about reforming some of this stuff. And it's not going to be
[Guest]: reformed, because that's how the system functions. It can't be reformed. If it gets reformed,
[Guest]: the system completely changes. So I think some of that acknowledgement came through in the West
[Guest]: also, you know, the idea that, oh, we got China wrong, and so on and so forth. And that started
[Guest]: this change over the last four or five years. China's policies accelerated that change. Today,
[Guest]: we're at the point where particularly the pandemic, you know, when Trump launched his trade
[Guest]: war, people were still arguing about how, you know, it's self-defeating, it's problematic,
[Guest]: and trade is not a zero-sum game, it benefits everybody and the rest of it. And all of that is
[Guest]: true. But it's started to move a conversation towards, well, okay, what are critical sectors?
[Guest]: Should we have dependencies in critical sectors? So even if I may still be okay with buying,
[Guest]: you know, my laptop table, which is China made, or my curtains, or my shoes, or my bags,
[Guest]: or whatever, but am I okay buying, even my mobile phone is okay, but am I okay buying my
[Guest]: core 5G network from Chinese vendors? Am I okay being completely reliant on my pharmaceutical
[Guest]: APIs coming from China? So some of those conversations about threats to supply chains
[Guest]: were about what are critical sectors, and should we have some degree of self-reliance,
[Guest]: or at least if not self-reliance, circles of trust within which we can work? And why is a circle of
[Guest]: trust important is because, well, the Chinese, if we have political issues with them, can leverage
[Guest]: these to coerce us. So how do we reduce their coercibility, or their power to coerce us in this
[Guest]: way? Now, all of this thinking is very different from the Bretton Woods Institution system,
[Guest]: you know, which talked about free trade and the rest of it, right? The idea that you should have
[Guest]: comparative, focus on comparative advantage, that sort of classic, classical idea. And I think that
[Guest]: sort of change is what we can expect going forward. And I think we're still in a state of flux,
[Guest]: right? So despite all this talk about de-globalization, and this talk about
[Guest]: cutting off from critical technologies, or at least creating resilience in all of this,
[Guest]: what, and I document this in the book through surveys from the American Chambers of Commerce,
[Guest]: from the European Chambers of Commerce, from China's trade with ASEAN, and China's global
[Guest]: GDP contribution, that it remains a critical, indispensable economic partner for the world.
[Guest]: In fact, China's contribution to global GDP will increase over the next five years. So it's going
[Guest]: to play a bigger role. And if you see what European companies or American companies in
[Guest]: China are saying, they're not saying we're exiting, you know, they are still saying we're
[Guest]: investing even more. In fact, just last week, you had another European Chamber of Commerce survey
[Guest]: come out, in which the number of companies saying that they are looking to possibly relocate came
[Guest]: down from 11% in 2020, to 9%, which is the lowest on record. So it's not like that de-globalization
[Guest]: is leading companies run out of China, because China offers fundamental economic advantages,
[Guest]: supply chain connectivity to the region and to the world. But what's happened is that there is a
[Guest]: trend to start to see how we can unravel some of these chains, particularly on critical sectors,
[Guest]: so that we can reduce coercibility. And that's something that's going to, that's a long term
[Guest]: phenomenon. So today, if India wants to reduce its pharmaceutical API dependence from China,
[Guest]: which is at about 75-80% of APIs we get from China, it is going to take us some time to build
[Guest]: that capacity, or to have that capacity be built in some other country where manufacturing is not
[Guest]: such a huge issue, but that we trust to be able to do some of these things. And I think these
[Guest]: are conversations which are still going on. And I think in the last chapter, I also talked about
[Guest]: how while there is a broad agreement that we need to do this, how do we do this? What are
[Guest]: the incentives of an India and America, Britain, France, when we come to this table? What is the
[Guest]: kind of give that you need to have? So on manufacturing of products, there may be different
[Guest]: issues, but say on things like regulations with regard to technology, or data governance,
[Guest]: our internal legislation is still not in place. So if we are going to talk about data security
[Guest]: and circles of trust, we need to first realize what is our system going to be like? That will
[Guest]: then create the room for how do we negotiate with the West? And what do we give? Because we also want
[Guest]: data sovereignty, whatever that means. And I think some of those conversations are going to shape the
[Guest]: next 5, 10, 15 years. At the same time, if you look at what the Chinese are saying, they are
[Guest]: saying, look, we are confident in our system, we are confident in our economic might, and we are
[Guest]: here to stay, we are not going anywhere. And one of the examples that we've seen in this year,
[Guest]: during the second wave in India, is that the Chinese emphasized how much of the health supplies
[Guest]: that we were getting, whether it was oxygenators, whether it was masks, or the rest of it, was coming
[Guest]: from China. They offered us aid also, but we seem to refuse that aid. But they were very keen to say
[Guest]: that, look, we are central to global supply chain. So you talk of decoupling and all of that, and you
[Guest]: know, you may ban some apps, you may do that and all that. But you can't decouple from us. Now,
[Guest]: the challenge for India and the rest of the world is to how do you decouple to the point where you
[Guest]: can create resilience, and you can create some degree of sense of security. And I think that's
[Guest]: the sort of push and pull that we will see playing out, rather than a Cold War of the conventional
[Guest]: kind, because you can't have a conventional Cold War, given China's indispensability to the global
[Guest]: economic system. To me, the biggest failure of Xi Jinping is the fact that we have come to the
[Guest]: point where we are saying that we want to do this. And now we're discussing modalities of how to do
[Guest]: this. Philosophically, we've accepted this. And states have accepted this. And the policies that
[Guest]: you've seen, like I said, I finished writing the book in late November. But what you've seen so
[Guest]: far, the fact that you had the first leaders summit of the Quad in March, the fact that you've
[Guest]: had a NATO summit, which refers to China as a threat, the fact that you've had a G7 summit,
[Guest]: which mentions China in a statement, all tells you of shifts that are taking place in the world.
[Guest]: The fact that at the G7 summit, India was an invitee, again, tells you that there is a shift
[Guest]: that's taking place. That shift will take time. But the fact that this has happened is what's
[Guest]: important from a failure of Chinese policy point of view. For Xi Jinping, what he's saying is that
[Guest]: I see this happening, and I, what's that term in poker or gambling, and I raise you more. He's
[Guest]: saying, look, you want to decouple, I've started decoupling. In April 2020, Xi Jinping gave a
[Guest]: speech where he said, we need to focus on technological self-reliance. There are these
[Guest]: bottleneck technologies, which people use to coerce us. We need to cultivate our strength in
[Guest]: that. At the same time, we need to create a system in which our vulnerability on the outside world
[Guest]: reduces while their vulnerability on us increases, particularly with regard to these technologies.
[Guest]: And he wants his system to work in that direction. And that's why partly, you know,
[Guest]: reorienting the economy and technology giants and so on and so forth. So he's very, very clear that
[Guest]: I need to do this, and my window to do this is also not that large anymore. So some bit of his
[Guest]: foreign policy is to maintain that window, at least for as long as he can, but also to accelerate
[Guest]: doing the kind of things that he needs to do to be able to expand China's stake in the world
[Guest]: and dependencies on China, so that China can't be coerced. Because if you look at it from his
[Guest]: point of view, Donald Trump coerced China. And that was among his worst fears. So for him,
[Guest]: he's trying to sort of push back on all of that. In the broad sense, he still sees the world as a
[Guest]: place for opportunities from his point of view, that there is still a window for strategic
[Guest]: opportunity. Although, as he himself says, there are unprecedented challenges that he's facing.
[Guest]: And I think that's the dynamic that you will see play out. That's what I mean, when I say for the
[Amit Varma]: next 5-10 years, this is what's going to shape the world. I think to begin with, what we should do
[Amit Varma]: is just as we banned TikTok, we should unban TikTok, we should ban Gobi Manchurian and Sri
[Amit Varma]: Sri Ravi Shankar should rename himself Shi Shi Ravi Shankar as a tribute that might help. I'm
[Amit Varma]: so sorry for that. But I had to, you know, this is a deep, deep subject. And obviously, one way that
[Amit Varma]: my listeners can learn about it is, of course, to buy a book, which I recommend they do instantly.
[Amit Varma]: But they can also sign up for your course on China. So I'll ask you to give details about
[Amit Varma]: the course, how can they sign up for it, where can they get more info, and also a traditional
[Amit Varma]: ending to the show. For people who want to know more about China, why don't you recommend
[Amit Varma]: some books which you think are a must read and hold lots of insight?
[Guest]: Right. So, so on the course, it happens once a year, we've still not decided when we're going
[Guest]: to do it this year. But yeah, just stay tuned to the Sakshi Shilla website, we'll be putting it up
[Guest]: over there. In terms of books, I mean, look, it depends on where you're starting from. But
[Guest]: if you want to get a nice, and this is a season for China books, given that the party's anniversary
[Guest]: is taking place. But if you want a good place to start on understanding how the system works,
[Guest]: and what happens, one of my favorite books is Wealth and Power. Really, really good. It gives
[Guest]: you a broad history through people, through individuals and their stories. And I think
[Guest]: that's really helpful. If you're really interested in the media side of things, I think Maria
[Guest]: Ratnikova's book is Media and Politics in China. I think that is really, really good. You can pick
[Guest]: that up. Although that's very academic. So you know, it might not be everybody's cup of tea.
[Guest]: Again, somebody who's sort of beginning, there's an interesting book called China Questions,
[Guest]: which again, deals with a lot of issues in a very simple manner, which allows you and it's
[Guest]: extremely accessible. So for people who are new to the subject, you can pick that up. A lot of
[Guest]: India China related books also that are available. Again, if you want a good introductory book,
[Guest]: pick up Anand Krishnan's new book, which came out earlier this year. Really well articulated
[Guest]: understanding of the Chinese system, the dynamic with India, and so I'd recommend that. But again,
[Guest]: there are so many. I'm assuming that people are picking up books which are sort of at a
[Guest]: starting level, entry level, where you're trying to get a grasp of the subject,
[Guest]: and which are accessible as opposed to deeply academic. So from an India China point of view,
[Guest]: I'd recommend picking up Anand's book. From a Chinese history point of view,
[Guest]: do pick up Wealth and Power. I think it's one of the best books that you'll have.
[Guest]: There are also lots of new books right now. I think there's a new book that's coming out in
[Guest]: the next week, which I am really looking forward to reading. It's called From Rebel to Ruler,
[Guest]: it's the story of the Communist Party. So I'm waiting to look forward to read that.
[Guest]: Three recent books that have come out, Ambassador Shivshankar Menon's book
[Guest]: on India and Asian geopolitics, Ambassador Vijay Gokhale's book on the Tiananmen Square incident.
[Guest]: I think that's a must read for anybody who wants to understand how do you approach this
[Guest]: approach studying Chinese politics, because he does it beautifully. And of course,
[Guest]: Avtar Singh Bhasin's book on India, China and Tibet, really great work on archival research
[Guest]: for just people to understand, given what's happening in Ladakh today,
[Guest]: for you to understand the roots of some of these challenges that we face today.
[Guest]: These are all great books. And of course, do also pick up my book. It'll give you a
[Guest]: broad-based perspective about what's happened in the last year, but also the trends over the
[Guest]: last few decades. And you know, that led us to what's happened in the last year,
[Amit Varma]: and what that means going forward. Manoj, this was such a fun conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show. Thank you, Amit. This was my pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Thank you.
[Unknown]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai